to a decline in coral health that is observed as a rise in the incidence of coral bleaching
and coral disease. In this study, we examine the effect of thermal stress on the natural
microbial community associated with the outer mucus layer and tissues of the coral,
Acropora digitifera. High-throughput sequencing of the 16S rRNA V4 hypervariable region revealed that prolonged exposure to thermal stress causes a shift in the diversity of
the coral microbial community. Notably, there is an increase in the population of bacteria
often found associated with diseased and stressed corals. These changes may correlate
with shifts in the metabolic function of the coral holobiont and may have detrimental
effects on the health and resilience of the coral. Taken together, our findings highlight the
impact of elevated seawater temperature on the bacterial composition and diversity in
corals and the effects of this on host metabolism.

signs of coral recovery. Fish abundance and biomass continued to increase until the
recent surveys. Increase can be attributed to the protection of the reefs where target or
commercially important species contributed much of the increase. Herbivore biomass
was also found to be increasing. Hence, protection is essential to increase resiliency from
typhoons and other climate change-related disturbances, which are expected to be more
frequent and severe in the future.

A VICIOUS CORAL REEF PREDATOR: MORPHOLOGICAL SPECIALIZATION
BROADENS THE DIET OF A MANTIS SHRIMP (Abstract ID: 29795)
Mantis shrimp are ubiquitous predators in tropical coral reefs. “Smasher” mantis shrimp
have specialized predatory appendages that produce among the fastest, most powerful
strikes ever reported in the animal kingdom. These forceful strikes are particularly
effective at breaking hard-shelled prey, such as snails and hermit crabs, and have a
large impact on the abundances of these prey. However, some anecdotal observations
suggest that smashers also consume soft-bodied, evasive prey. We examined the diet
of a Caribbean coral reef flat smasher, Neogonodactylus bredini. We coupled studies of
prey abundance in the field and feeding behavior experiments to inform a stable isotope
analysis of diet using a Bayesian mixing model (MixSIAR). Unexpectedly, we found that
soft-bodied prey, primarily fish but also worms and snapping shrimp, comprise a large
proportion of the diet, in addition to clams, crabs, hermit crabs, and snails. This result
held even when informative priors were constructed to reflect a specialist diet on hardshelled prey and prey abundances in the field (30-50%, depending on the informative
corresponds to a broad diet of both hard-shelled and soft-bodied prey. Despite their
powerful punch, mantis shrimp are the major diet item of common reef animals. Given
that they are very abundant and consumed by a diversity of larger predators, while also
reef food webs.


THERMOTOLERANCE AND PHOTOACCLIMATION IN SYMBIODINIUM: PHYSIOLOGICAL AND TRANSCRIPTOMIC APPROACH OVER A TEMPORAL SCALE
(Abstract ID: 30028)


We quantified thermotolerance in 11 cultures from different populations of five species
growth and photochemical efficiency (Fv/Fm). Thermotolerance was not restricted to
a single species but it was widespread across species and cultures, showing a gradient
from susceptible to tolerant. All cultures at 32°C decreased growth and Fv/Fm. To test
was explored first using cDNA microarrays before (day -2), and during acclimation (day
6 & 16). Differentially expressed genes (DEG) due to increased temperature were time
dependent. DEG on day 16 were likely a result of the start of the stationary phase in
culture. Similarly, RNA-Seq data (day 5 and 7) suggest temporal variation in gene expression with major changes in heat-shock proteins and chaperones. Retrotransposons were
highly expressed on day 7, indicating high stress during thermal exposure. Adaptation
to higher temperatures is not restricted to a single clade or species but it is widespread
within species. However, acclimating to higher temperatures compromises health and
increases chaperone activity.

SPECIES-LEVEL VARIABILITY IN SUPEROXIDE PRODUCTION BY SYMBIOTIC
CORALS (Abstract ID: 28193 | Poster ID: 107)
Superoxide, a reactive oxygen species (ROS), is both beneficial and detrimental to
biological systems. In corals, superoxide has been implicated in bleaching, while also
having a potential role in defense against pathogens. However, an understanding of the
superoxide dynamics and sources within corals is currently missing due to a lack of
direct in situ superoxide measurements. By conducting the first direct measurements
of superoxide produced by corals on a natural reef during a bleaching event, we show
substantial species-specific variation in external superoxide levels, which reflect the
balance of production and degradation processes. Porites lobata,Porites compressa, Pocillopora damicornis, and Fungia scutaria maintained average external levels of superoxide
that were approximately 100, 50, 20, and 2 nM above background seawater concentrations, respectively. However, superoxide levels adjacent to Montipora capitata were below
levels present in the surrounding seawater, pointing to net degradation of superoxide
and possible involvement of extracellular antioxidants. In all species, external superoxide
levels were decoupled from the abundance of the photosynthetic endosymbiont
Symbiodinium. However, aposymbiotic coral larvae and cultures of bacterial symbionts
produced extracellular superoxide and may contribute to external superoxide levels.
These results suggest potential species-specific roles for extracellular superoxide dynamics in the health, development and recruitment of symbiotic corals.


ENGAGING MILLENNIAL NON-SCIENTISTS IN CORAL REEF CONSERVATION
THROUGH DIGITAL MEDIA STRATEGIES (Abstract ID: 30088 | Poster ID: 708)
Skandha is a project aimed at raising climate change awareness. Our focus is communicating science to the general public, particularly millennials, as they are digital natives
well versed in the language of online media. In collaboration with more than 30 volunteers from different disciplines, Skandha has run several successful campaigns in Mexico
City, including raising awareness of energy consumption, and organizing climate change
talks with undergraduates. In an online campaign, we repurposed marketing techniques
originally developed for commercial needs, and applied them in digital communication
of climate science. With these methods, we designed a new digital communication
strategy for the Mexican Coral Reef Society (SOMAC), using a Facebook fan page. In
the first 3 months we reached more than 1,000 organic likes. In 6 months, 80 posts were
published, reaching at least 1,300 people each, resulting in an average of 60 engagement
actions per post. For each post in the fan page linked to the SOMAC website, daily visits
increased 6-fold, with 86% being new users. The fan page audience is 91% Mexican,


RESPONSE OF CORAL ASSOCIATED BACTERIA TOWARD THERMAL STRESS
(Abstract ID: 27872 | Poster ID: 150)
The coral holobiont includes the coral animal, its dinoflagellate symbionts, and its associated microbial community. Symbionts complement the host genome by providing

83

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

NOAA’s Coral Reef Conservation Program, in partnership with the National Centers for
Coastal Ocean Science, is leading an effort to incorporate social and economic monitoring into a new, integrated national monitoring plan for US coral reef jurisdictions. The
National Coral Reef Monitoring Program includes three components: biological, climate,
and socioeconomic. The socioeconomic component includes gathering information on
population change, use of coral reef resources, and knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions of coral reef resources and management. The overall goal of the socioeconomic
monitoring is to track relevant social and economic information for each jurisdiction
in order to investigate the impacts of society on coral reefs and the contributions of
healthy corals to nearby communities. Data collection is complete for South Florida,
Puerto Rico, American Samoa, and Hawaii, while efforts in Guam, the Commonwealth
of Northern Mariana Islands, and the US Virgin Islands are in development. The three
data streams, biological, climate and socioeconomic, are intended to be combined into
a single comprehensive monitoring program for the coral reef ecosystem. As a first step
towards integration, the data will be analyzed and scored through the use of indicators
in a report card for each jurisdiction. Future steps might include using the data to: understand gaps between actual and perceived resource condition, predict the populations
most likely to engage in pro-environmental behaviors, and assess the importance of reef
species to the provision of food and livelihoods.

and 78% of the audience belongs to the millennial generation (ages 18-34). Initial results
demonstrate that using methods developed for commercial marketing can enhance
climate science communication by encouraging social media engagement, leading to
increased traffic to environmental organizations’ web sites for further learning. Skandha
is taking novel steps toward improving climate change awareness and preservation of
Mexican coral reefs.

MACROALGAE AND CO2: EXPERIMENTAL APPROACHES TO UNDERSTANDING CABON-USE STRATEGIES AND COMPETITIVE MECHANISMS BETWEEN
ALGAE AND CORALS (Abstract ID: 28677)


Understanding the drivers and mechanisms leading to increased macroalgal (seaweed)
abundance in coral reefs is of critical importance. Human-induced ocean acidification
(OA) due to elevated carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations in seawater has been suggested to stimulate macroalgal growth and abundance on reefs. However, little is known
about the physiological mechanisms by which reef macroalgae use CO2 or bicarbonate
(HCO3-) from the bulk seawater for photosynthesis, or, what species could benefit from
benefit macroalgae over corals in competitive interactions, contributing to reef degradation. However, the mechanisms used by algae to outcompete corals under elevated CO2
are unknown. In this talk, I will show how we are using experimental approaches to
tackle these questions. For example, the use of carbon isotopes in macroalgae from the
Great Barrier Reef (GBR) shows that algae have diverse carbon-use strategies granting
increased CO2 and GBR offshore reefs seem more sensitive to impacts of OA induced
algal proliferation. Our experiments on how algae outcompete corals under OA show a
variety of mechanisms including increased algal allelopathy, elevated algal DOC production and increased coral susceptibility to algal overgrowth. These experimental outcomes
are providing key information to fill gaps in our understanding of the impacts of elevated
CO2 on the ecology and resilience of coral reefs.

DERMAL DENTICLES AS A TOOL TO RECONSTRUCT HISTORICAL SHARK
COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 28658)
What were shark communities like before humans? Ecological surveys and historical
records demonstrate significant declines in Caribbean shark populations, yet preexploitation baselines are nonexistent. Fossilized dermal denticles – tiny, tooth-like scales
lining the skin of elasmobranchs – may offer insight into pre-human shark communities
on reefs. Denticles are well-preserved in fossil reef sediments, but their identification
represents a major challenge. We built a large reference collection from museum and local
collections comprising 215 denticles from 37 species within 16 families. Morphometric
analysis revealed that denticle morphology is loosely tied to clade, making species-level
identification impossible. We found, however, that denticle traits are strongly correlated
with life habit and feeding mode. Fast, predatory sharks possess thin, ridged ‘drag reduction’ denticles, whereas demersal sharks, such as nurse sharks, are characterized by thick
‘abrasion strength’ denticles. We extracted 254 denticles from a 7,000-year-old fossil reef
and 602 denticles from comparable modern reefs in Bocas del Toro, Panama and classified them using the reference collection. Both denticle assemblages corresponded well
with families documented in the region. Preliminary data showed a significant decrease in
the relative abundance of ‘drag reduction’ denticles and an increase in ‘abrasion strength’
denticles over the past ~7,000 years. This suggests that, irrespective of changes in the
number of sharks, an important shift in shark community composition has occurred.


UNDERSTANDING THE TAXONOMY OF THE MESOPHOTIC CORAL GENUS
LEPTOSERIS: THE NEXT CHAPTER (Abstract ID: 28274 | Poster ID: 339)
Growing interest in mesophotic coral reef ecosystems (MCEs) has stimulated interest in
the taxonomy and biology of mesophotic corals. A key example is the agariciid genus
Leptoseris which is often a dominant coral in MCEs. Historically, Leptoseris has not been
well represented in museum collections, and despite the systematic review of Leptoseris
by Dinesen (1980), from a taxonomic perspective it has not been widely studied. However, advances in molecular techniques and integrated systematic approaches, combining
molecular and micro-morphological studies with traditional macro-morphological approaches, have enabled new insights into Leptoseris. This integrated taxonomic approach
has certainly facilitated understanding of mesophotic agariciid corals such as species of
Leptoseris and Pavona in Hawai’i (Luck et al. 2013). However, there have been challenges
in reconciling traditional morphological characters with the results of molecular genetic
analysis for Leptoseris from other geographic areas. Recent research has also highlighted
the importance of access to original type material to resolve key taxonomic questions,
update on progress in unravelling the taxonomic status of Leptoseris species, in light of

ARE MARINE SUTURE ZONES EVOLUTIONARY LABORATORIES? INSIGHTS
FROM GENETIC STUDIES OF REEF FISH HYBRIDISATION (Abstract ID: 28609)
Closely related species can provide valuable insights into evolutionary processes through
their ecology, distribution, and the history recorded in their genomes. In the Indo-Pacific,
many reef fishes are divided into sister species in the Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean, with
a zone of overlap in the eastern Indian Ocean; this often leads to hybridisation between
them. More recent work has characterised marine suture zones in the Western Indian
Ocean and Pacific Ocean. The aim of this presentation is to review genetic studies of reef
fish hybridisation in recognised suture zones, and address whether the patterns therein
represents incomplete speciation, secondary contact, an evolutionary dead-end (for hybrids)
or some combination of the above. Further comparison to studies in the terrestrial realm
and the potential application of emerging genomic technologies are discussed.


THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF SOCIOECONOMIC MONITORING FOR CORAL REEF
CONSERVATION IN THE US (Abstract ID: 28085)
84

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

attracted to damaged coral tissue and our findings suggest that it is likely that snails actively migrated into the affected reef area and were taking advantage of the dying coral
tissue. Our observations add further evidence to the potential importance of corallivores
on disease processes.

GENOMIC INSIGHT INTO HOST-ENDOSYMBIONT RELATIONSHIP OF ENDOZOICOMONAS MONTIPORAE CL-33T WITH ITS CORAL HOST (Abstract ID: 29147)
The bacteria Endozoicomonas are commonly detected in healthy corals in coral
associated bacteria studies. They are likely to be a core member of coral microbiota,
however, little is known about their roles inside corals. To decipher interactions between
the bacteria and their coral hosts, we conducted genomic and physiological approaches
genome (5.43Mb, 99.8% in completeness) revealed abundant mobile elements than the
other Endozoicomonas species. A number of genes potentially related to bacteria-host
interactions were identified. Testosterone degrading genes and type III secretion system
were commonly present in Endozoicomonas species and that might assist to recognize
or deliver effectors to their hosts. Several secreted eukaryotic domain proteins identified,
such as myosin-tail domain protein and serine/threonine protein kinases, suggesting this
bacterium may modulate its host’s signaling pathways and vesicle trafficking. Moreover,
the genes of eukaryotic ephrin ligand B2 were surprisingly found in its genome, inferring
that the bacterium could enter coral cells by endocytosis via binding to host’s Eph receptors. In addition, some T3SS effectors encoded by the bacterium, such as 7,8-dihydro8-oxoguanine triphosphatase and isocitrate lyase, might prevent mitochondria dysfunction and aid gluconeogenesis efficiency, especially under stress. All those findings suggest
communicate and modulate its coral host.


PREDATOR-PREY INTERACTIONS ON CORAL VS ALGAL DOMINATED REEFS:
BEHAVIORAL PLASTICITY AND SURVIVORSHIP OF JUVENILE FISHES (Abstract
ID: 27906)
Many healthy reefs dominated by corals have transitioned to degraded reefs dominated
by seaweeds. Impact of this phase shift on the behavior and survivorship of coral reef
fishes is poorly understood, but could affect survival of recruits and export of juveniles
from healthy to degraded locations where fishes could enhance reef resilience and
recovery. Using experimental patch reefs in pairs of adjacent healthy (MPAs) and
degraded (non-MPAs) reefs, we identified between-habitat differences in predators,
patterns of attack, and prey behaviors that affect survival in these divergent habitats. Primary predators in MPAs were rapidly moving wrasses attacking from above; prey here
selectively used higher portions of the reefs to visually monitor predators. Conversely,
predators in seaweed dominated, non-MPAs were sit-and-wait predators that ambushed
upward from the benthos. Prey here selectively used lower portions of reefs where
they could presumably better detect chemical cues from sit-and-wait predators. In both
situations, prey seemed selected to detect, rather than spatially avoid, predators. Prey
fishes reciprocally moved from MPA to non-MPA, or vice versa, experienced a 3-16 fold
increase in mortality compared to fishes relocated within their initial habitat. Prey that
survived relocation adjusted behaviors to match fishes naturally found within the new
habitat. Our findings suggest that habitat quality, predator community composition, and
prey behaviors interact to affect prey survival, and that prey behavior is dynamic and
crucial as reefs under-go regime shifts


PARTICIPATORY MAPPING: TOOLS FOR INTEGRATING LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
INTO MARINE PLANNING (Abstract ID: 28072)
Coastal communities harbor a wealth of social knowledge about their ocean spaces that
can lend critical insight to marine planning and MPA design and management. Participatory mapping is an evolving tool that combines traditional stakeholder engagement
strategies with GIS techniques to capture and transform place-based knowledge into
socio-spatial planning information. When integrated with conventional marine planning
strategies, participatory mapping works to translate social perspectives about the ocean
and coast into a spatial context while providing a forum for sharing opinions, historical
perspectives and perceptions about potential social or ecological impacts of proposed
planning strategies. NOAA’s Marine Protected Areas Center has designed a participatory mapping strategy to engage marine communities in the documentation of social
knowledge to inform a wide range of marine planning efforts. This flexible process has
been applied at varying scales and with a wide range of partners and funding scenarios,
all with the intent of gathering community perspectives while building relationships and
local trust and support for developing marine plans. Participatory mapping promotes
collaborative planning, giving communities a voice throughout the decision-making process while yielding valuable, spatial human dimensions information. This presentation
will highlight NOAA’s participatory mapping efforts, discuss the tools and techniques, and
share common challenges and solutions for planning and implementing participatory
mapping efforts for marine planning and management.


TRIPNEUSTES GRATILLA AS A POTENTIAL DISPERSAL AGENT OF THE CORAL
MONTIPORA DIGITATA IN BOLINAO, PANGASINAN, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID:
29894 | Poster ID: 196)
Montipora digitata propagates primarily by fragmentation and occurs in isolated yet
extensive patches in sandy, shallow reef flats in the northwestern Philippines. The sea
urchin Tripneustes gratilla, also common in these areas, is known to pick up fragments of
rock and algae to conceal itself in the sandy habitat. This study tests if sea urchins can
the distance travelled by urchins carrying different sized fragments, monitoring the shortterm survivorship of coral fragments after deposition on the unconsolidated substrate,
and test tissue histocompatibility among established colonies within the same coral
frequently (61%) than live ones (39%) (X2 test, p<0.05), it had no particular aversion
to picking up live corals. The distances travelled by the sea urchin while carrying coral
fragments were not significantly different with respect to fragment size (ANOVA, p>0.05).
and continued to grow during the 2-month observation. Fragments from different
colonies in the same patches exhibited tissue fusion indicating that growing, established
coral colonies tested may have the same colony origin. These results indicate that mobile
macrofauna may be crucial in the successful establishment of sessile, clonal organisms
such as corals in physically unstable reef areas.


RESPONSE OF FISH AND SNAIL CORALLIVORES TO AN OUTBREAK OF ACUTE
TISSUE LOSS DISEASE ON THE REEFS OF VAAN ISLAND IN THE GULF OF
MANNAR, INDIA (Abstract ID: 28496)


Outbreaks of tissue loss diseases in corals are becoming more common resulting in
direct colony mortality and also affecting the animals that depend on corals for food
and shelter. We documented an outbreak of an acute tissue loss disease on a reef in
the Gulf of Mannar, India and compared the density of fish and snail corallivores in the
outbreak area to an adjacent control area. Line-intercept on three transects within each
area (outbreak and control) found both areas dominated by the coral, Montipora digitata.
tissue loss as compared to 0.33% in the control area. This is the first report of a disease
outbreak on the reefs in the Gulf of Mannar. Coral-feeding butterfly fish were observed
feeding directly on diseased coral tissue in the affected area but belt transects found the
density of butterflyfish to be similar between the outbreak and control area. In contrast,
drupellid snails were also observed feeding on disease margins of affected colonies but
densities were significantly higher in the outbreak area (avg. 2.2±0.9 snails/m2 coral)
as compared to the control area (avg. 0.003±0.001 snails/m2 coral). Drupellids are

RECOVERY OF MONTIPORA CAPITATA AND PORITES COMPRESSA FROM
BLEACHING UNDER OCEAN ACIDIFICATION CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 29624)
We experimentally investigated the effects of pCO2 (ambient, 364 micro atm vs.
elevated, 750 micro atm) and feeding (fed zooplankton vs. not fed) on the recovery
hypotheses: 1) ocean acidification (OA) increases recovery time from bleaching, and
85

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

gains from adopting a more effective inoculant than the one available to past control
programs and field reports on starfish relative abundance coming from a dedicated
surveillance program of unprecedented resolution, the first year of the AMPTO program
was able to cull <10% of the large starfish estimated to exist in the outbreak domain.
The control program has since contracted to the local defence of reefs critical to the dive
tourism market; a scale at which hand control has proven effective at maintaining coral
cover. The failed attempt at population-scale control yields insights into the dynamics
of these mass eruptions on the GBR and suggests that a different strategy should be
attempted to suppress or delay a fifth cycle of outbreaks.

2) zooplankton feeding enhances the rate of recovery from bleaching. Preliminary data
shows that chlorophyll a was lower in bleached corals than non-bleached corals initially,
but no longer differed after 7 months independent of pCO2 or feeding in both species.
of the experiment. Zooplankton feeding did mitigate the negative effects of OA on P:R
in both species despite the overall feeding rates being depressed under OA conditions
after 7 months of exposure. The maintenance of biomass across all treatments and
species suggests that any negative effects of OA on coral recovery from bleaching might
be minimal. Overall, our results to date suggest that zooplankton feeding does play a
role in mediating elevated pCO2 during recovery from bleaching, but there is yet no
clear pattern of the effects of OA on recovery rates. Additional data, including carbon
budgets over the course of the year-long experiment, will be presented. This research
will provide new insights in understanding the factors that allow certain corals to recover
more quickly from bleaching in an increasingly acidic ocean, providing a tool for identifying coral resilience traits.


DEVELOPMENT OF ACOUSTIC METHODS TO INVESTIGATE HAWAIIAN
SEMI-DEMERSAL FISH DISTRIBUTION AND ABUNDANCE FOR MONITORING
STOCKS (Abstract ID: 27965)


Presently, only fisheries-dependent methods are used for stock assessment and management of six economically important Hawaiian snapper species and an endemic grouper
(collectively known as ‘Deep-7’). Active acoustic methods have been successfully employed for stock assessment of semi-demersal fish in non-trawlable regions elsewhere
and have potential advantages over the current assessment methods. Acoustic backscatter data and complementary methodologies involving target strength (TS) measurements
of tethered fish, video-camera observations, and fishing were used to model TS and
develop acoustic descriptors such as aggregation shape, size, and density, individual
swimming pattern, distance from bottom, and bottom depth for Deep-7 species. Paired
observations of in situ TS and fork length (FL) gave an estimated TS-FL relationship
for Deep-7 species: 23.01∙log10(FL)-72.18. Acoustic data indicated high spatiotemporal
variability, with higher number of detections during daytime than at night. Most Deep-7
fish were found between 110 and 330 m depths, within 50 m of the bottom, with both
tightly aggregated and loosely grouped fish contributing significantly to biomass and
abundance. While results are preliminary, they indicate that acoustics could be successfully used to monitor Deep-7 stocks in Hawaii. Abundance and biomass estimates can
be improved by fine tuning acoustic descriptors using additional data and improving
biomass estimates in the deadzone.

INVESTIGATING POPULATION GENETICS OF THE SCLERACTINIAN CORAL,
MONTASTRAEA CAVERNOSA, ALONG THE FLORIDA CORAL REEF TRACT’S
NORTHERN EXTENT (Abstract ID: 29063 | Poster ID: 317)
Coral reef populations on Florida’s central east coast are located at unique boundaries
that are susceptible to many anthropogenic influences including controlled freshwater
discharge and agricultural runoff. Natural environmental variability is relatively high as
a result of seasonal rainfall and upwelling patterns. Neither coral spawning nor gamete
development have been observed at the northern end of the Florida Coral Reef Tract,
therefore we hypothesize that this region may represent a population sink for many coral
species. To better understand coral population connectivity of reefs in Southeast Florida,
populations of the scleractinian coralMontastraea cavernosa were examined. This species’ wide geographic distribution throughout the Tropical Western Atlantic and broad
depth range from 3 to 100 meter depths allow comparisons of both horizontal and vertical connectivity. However, few investigations of this species have focused on southeast
Florida. Saint Lucie Reef near Stuart and Breakers Reef near Palm Beach represent the
upper latitudinal limits for many scleractinian coral species along the Florida Coral Reef
Tract. This study aims to compare microsatellite genetic markers from these reefs to understand their connectivity and determine influences of the Florida current on dispersal,
recruitment, and population structure.



TRANSGENERATIONAL PLASTICITY DEPENDS ON RATE OF WARMING
ACROSS GENERATIONS (Abstract ID: 28001)

ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29788)

Predicting the impacts of climate change to biological systems relies on an understanding of the ability for species to acclimate to the projected environmental change through
phenotypic plasticity. Determining the effects of higher temperatures on individual performance is made more complex by the potential for environmental conditions experienced in previous and current generations to independently affect phenotypic responses
to high temperatures. We used a model coral reef fish to investigate the influence of
thermal conditions experienced by adult breeding pairs and their parents on reproductive output and the quality of offspring produced. We found that more gradual warming
over two generations resulted in greater plasticity of reproductive attributes, compared
to fish that experienced the same increase in one generation. When fish experienced
+3.0 °C experienced for two generations reproduction ceased in the expected future
summer conditions (31.5 °C). Additionally, we found that transgenerational plasticity to
+1.5 °C induced full restoration of previously thermally effect reproductive and offspring
attributes, which was not possible with developmental plasticity alone. Our results suggest that transgenerational effects differ depending on the absolute thermal change and
during what life stage the thermal change is experienced.

The queen conch is one of the most highly valued fishery resources in the Caribbean,
but populations throughout its range have declined severely, and available data are insufficient for conducting traditional stock assessments. In most areas, it has been difficult
to equally judge the effects of both traditional and spatial management measures. To
address this deficiency, we conducted stratified fishery-independent surveys of queen
tree analyses were used to identify relationships between conch densities and measured
ecosystem variables. Habitat type was the strongest predictor of juvenile densities, followed by management zone (marine protected area versus open fishing area), and water
depth. The model predicted that the highest densities of juveniles would be found in
patchy (30-50% cover) and continuous seagrass within the marine protected area in 1115 m of water (2178 per hectare). Adult densities were predicted to be highest (523 per
hectare) across several different habitat types, at depths between 21-30 m also within the
marine reserve. This method of extrapolating population densities incorporating multiple
ecosystem components represents an innovative approach for assessing the status of
this data-limited species. It provides a robust means to evaluate performance of marine
spatial protection and can identify key habitat and ecosystem characteristics deserving
of additional management consideration.



A NEW, HIGH-RESOLUTION GLOBAL MASS CORAL BLEACHING DATABASE
(Abstract ID: 28000)

OBSERVATIONS ON CONTROLLING CROWN-OF-THORNS STARFISH OUTBREAKS BY INJECTION (Abstract ID: 30106)

Episodes of mass coral bleaching have been reported in recent decades and have
raised concerns about the future of coral reefs on a warming planet. Despite the efforts
to enhance and coordinate coral reef monitoring within and across countries, our
knowledge of the geographic extent of mass coral bleaching over the past few decades
is incomplete. Existing databases like Reefbase are biased by their voluntary nature and
the location of prominent science and/or monitoring programs, thus creating a problem

In 2012, users of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park began to report numerous outbreaks of the Crown-of-Thorns Starfish (CoTS) on mid-shelf reefs between Cairns and
Lizard Island signalling the start of the fourth major eruption of this native pest since the
1960s. In the same year, the Association of Marine Parks Tourism Operators (AMPTO)
mobilised funds from the Australian Government and began a program of diver-based
hand control that has since killed over 400,000 starfish by injection. Despite efficiency
86

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

indicate that in a changing climate, epiphytic LBFs are particularly important to survival
of calcifying macroalgae. In contrast, LBFs can benefit from elevated daytime pH conditions in the microenviroment of a non-calcifying macroalgae, ameliorating impacts of
climate change.

of false negatives. The spatial extent of reported bleaching events is also unclear, as
In this project, we have developed the first-ever gridded, global-scale historical coral
bleaching database. First, we conducted a targeted search for bleaching reports not
included in Reefbase by surveying the academic and grey literature and by personally
contacting scientists and divers conducting monitoring in under-reported locations. This
search increased the number of observed bleaching reports by 79%, from 4146 to 7429
(through the year 2012). Second, we employed spatially interpolation, using techniques
borrowed from species distribution modelling, to develop annual 4 km x 4 km global
maps of the probability that bleaching occurred. The database will help the scientific
community more accurately assess the change in the frequency of mass coral bleaching
events, validate methods of predicting mass coral bleaching, and test whether coral reefs
are adjusting to rising ocean temperatures



PREDICTING CORAL GROWTH (Abstract ID: 29283 | Poster ID: 510)
Predicting reef coral demographic rates is a critical part of forecasting the future of reefs
under global change. This is challenging for highly diverse communities such as coral
reefs, where a species by species approach is logistically unfeasible. A potential solution
is to predict demographic rates from species traits. Here, we test this approach to predict
coral growth rates. We ask whether most variation in coral growth rates occurs at the
species level, morphological group level or at individual level through time. We estimate
growth as change in planar area for 11 species of scleractinian corals, across five morphological groups (tabular, branching, digitate, corymbose and massive), and over five years.
We show that coral growth scales with size according to a universal power law (that is the
power law exponent is constant across species and morphological groups). Coral growth
rates are best predicted from colony size and morphology rather than species. However,
annual variation in growth rates is greater than variation among morphological groups,
with slow growing morphological groups (massive and digitate) having more stable
growth rates than faster growing morphological groups (tabular and branching). Finally,
we show that colonial corals have pseudo-determinate growth: on average coral colonies
stop growing at a certain size, which varies with morphological group. Colony size and
morphological group are the most important predictors of coral growth rates.

ECOSYSTEM REGIMES AND RESILIENCE OF HAWAIIAN CORAL REEFS (Abstract
ID: 29152)
Coral reefs worldwide face an uncertain future with many reefs transitioning from cover
dominated by coral to algae. This binary view of coral reefs is limited in that it does not
consider the underlying processes and complexities of the ecosystem that might relate
to the resilience of coral or macroalgal dominated states. This study utilized a large
database synthesized from multiple sources by collaborating with various monitoring
programs and stakeholders, allowing analysis at a scale commensurate with ecosystemand resilience-based management in the Hawaiian Islands. To better describe coral
reef ecosystems in terms of the communities that compose them, fish and benthic
assemblages were considered together to define reef regimes. Model-based clustering
revealed five distinct regimes that were then mapped to understand the spatial distribution and variation across the Hawaiian Islands. With this nuanced perspective of coral
reefs, we identified a regime that was classified by low coral and low macroalgae but
high fish biomass, and what was previously considered a single coral regime was broken
into several regimes that varied in their ecology and relative resilience to human drivers.
This project was co-developed with state and federal agencies, NGOs, and community
groups to build partnerships for practical implementation of ecosystem-based management by utilizing monitoring data to understand the effects of human drivers on coral
reef ecosystems.


DISTURBANCE MEDIATED ECOLOGICAL TRADE-OFFS DURING CORAL RECRUITMENT (Abstract ID: 28900)
In 1977, Peter Grubb proposed the theory of the regeneration niche: defining the
environmental conditions that allow new individuals to colonise an area successfully and
become established in the local population. By doing so, ontogenetic trade-offs can be
quantified and the recruitment of individuals predicted under multiple scenarios of biophysical forcing. Here, I present the findings of a two-year study in which we combined
field observations with laboratory and field experiments to parameterise an individualbased model aimed at developing a mechanistic understanding of the ecological
trade-offs that occur during coral recruitment. The investigation focuses on the individual
processes involved in recruitment – beginning at larval settlement and continuing until
recruitment bottlenecks are surpassed – and incorporates the microhabitat complexity that is key in understanding benthic recruitment. Our results demonstrate that
coral settlement is higher in crevices than exposed microhabitats, but post-settlement
bottlenecks differ markedly in the presence and absence of predators. Maximum recruitment occurs in crevice microhabitats of uncaged treatments, being 9-fold higher than
caged treatments. Overall, we uncover the trade-offs between growth, competition and
predation, highlighting how these change and even reverse during ontogeny and under
alternate disturbance regimes.


Large benthic foraminifera (LBFs) are vital producers of calcium carbonate, and commonly live as epiphytes on marine algae. Marine algae have large diffusive boundary
layers, elevating pH around the algae during daytime photosynthesis. Effects of changing
ocean temperature and chemistry on LBFs as epiphytes are unknown. Two macroalgae
(a calcifying green algaeHalimeda tuna, and a non-calcifying red algae Laurencia intricata)
were incubated with a common epiphytic LBF, Marginopora vertebralis in current and
future conditions of ocean acidification and warming for 15 days. Increased bleaching of
of H tunadecreased in the high temperature and acidification treatment, while those


A HIGH-RESOLUTION CHARACTERIZATION OF SYMBIODINIUM COMMUNITIES ALONG A DEPTH GRADIENT IN THE REEF-BUILDING CORAL SIDERASTREA SIDEREA (Abstract ID: 29615 | Poster ID: 128)
87

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

The relationship between corals and their endosymbiotic dinoflagellates, Symbiodinium,
is a dynamic yet fragile symbiosis. Understanding the flexibility of this symbiosis is
central to predicting the long-term response of corals to climate change. Previous studies
have shown corals exhibit different patterns of Symbiodinium community composition
between areas of varied susceptibility to environmental fluctuation, such as in shallow
versus deeper reefs. Until recently, studies used cloning or electrophoresis-based techniques that are prone to underestimates of diversity. This study applies next-generation
sequencing to assess Symbiodinium community composition within the same coral species at different depths. We analyzed the Symbiodinium communities within Siderastrea
siderea colonies collected in the Florida Middle Keys reefs at three depths: 11, 18, and
27 m. Symbiodinium community composition was determined using Illumina paired-end
sequencing of the cp23S rDNA region. We identified a strikingly diverse Symbiodinium
symbiosis across areas with varying degrees of exposure to environmental variability.

PERSONAL CARE PRODUCT POLLUTION ON CORAL REEFS: TOXICOLOGY
AND CONTAMINATION OF UV SUNSCREENS, PRESERVATIVES, PLASTIC MICROSPHERES AND OTHER INGREDIENTS (Abstract ID: 29544)


IN-SITU MEASUREMENTS OF SOLAR EXPOSURE DISTRIBUTION ON A CORAL
REEF: PRELIMINARY FINDINGS RELATING TO REEF ASPECT, WATER TURBIDITY AND DOSIMETER DESIGN (Abstract ID: 28454 | Poster ID: 545)

INSIGHTS INTO THE EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE AND/OR ACIDIFICATION
ON CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 28119)

Thin film dosimeters have been used for the measurement of solar radiation since the
1970s. Their application includes personal exposure measurement and environmental
exposure monitoring. Polyphenylene oxide (PPO) films have recently been developed
for use in various underwater environments. These dosimeters are capable of measuring solar ultraviolet-B (UVB, 290 – 315 nm), which is a recognized physical stressor of
corals when combined with elevated water temperatures occurring within the irregular
structure of a coral reef. We present preliminary findings employing a newly developed
PPO dosimeter clamp deployed upon reef building corals situated within turbid inshore
waters of the Great Sandy Marine Park, Southern Queensland, Australia. UVB exposures
measured over a 24 hour period during peak summer exposure conditions ranged from
12.11 kJ m-2 to 21.13 kJ m-2. This preliminary data showed a clear dependence on reef
aspect with the highest exposures incident upon north facing (Southern Hemisphere)
reef surfaces. We conclude that exposure stress to corals may still occur in shallow
turbid water with UVB exposure being strongly associated with reef aspect.

enter coral reef either through swimmers, or predominantly as sewage effluent. The
impact of these chemicals is only now beginning to be discovered. We show the toxic
and different types of microspheres (plastic, castor bean, cellulose). We also show levels
of these ingredients in waters of coral reef environments, as well as in corals themselves.
We provide a risk assessment as to the threat these ingredients pose to coral reefs. We
provide a number of options that local communities, businesses, management agencies,
and legislators can implement that will mitigate this source of pollution.

Coral Reefs are expected to experience reduced rates of calcification in response
to projected ocean warming and acidification. The actual impact of different future
scenarios, given as representative carbon pathways (RCP), or the separate impacts of
ocean warming and acidification on coral reef calcification need to be quantified if
we are to correctly assess the long term costs of different pathways and actions to the
maintenance of essential ecosystem services such as coastal protection. In the present
study, we determined whole system calcification rates for mini reefs reconstructed from
the principal components of a southern Great Barrier Reef fore-reef over annual periods
that included natural daily and seasonal variability. The results showed that: (i) under
present day scenarios, reefs calcified 3-fold faster in summer than in winter; (ii) reefs
failed to calcify over the long-term under RCP4.5 and were in a state of decalcification
under RCP8.5, with the principal difference between RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 associated
with the level of decalcification occurring at night rather than differences in daytime
calcification rates; (iii) RCP8.5 warming decreased reef calcification rate as a result of
coral mortality and increased microbial sediment abundance, whereas RCP8.5 acidification decreased reef calcification by increasing decalcification in the dark. The results
present empirical support for the consensus that CO2 emissions must be curtailed, but
also suggests that the negative impact of acidification on the carbonate balance of reefs
predominantly occurs at night.



THE THREAT OF BOAT ANTIFOULANT PAINTS TO CORAL REEFS: PERMENANT MOORING AND ANCHORING SITES AS A SIGNIFICANT SOURCE OF
LOCALIZED CORAL REEF DEGRADATION (Abstract ID: 29605 | Poster ID: 465)

A CNIDARIAN-SPECIFIC IONOTROPIC GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR LINEAGE
FUNCTIONALLY INVOLVED IN IMMUNITY (Abstract ID: 28405)

Reports have accrued from all over the world for the past 15 years regarding a zone of
mortality and degradation regarding permanent moorings for small boats (less than 30
meters), usually the length of the mooring line. We conducted a two phase investigation.
The first phase examined the ecotoxicological effects of two major antifoulant ingredients (cuprous oxide, tributyltin) on major coral reef ecological receptors, including sea
urchin embryos (Tripneustes gratilla & Tripneustes ventricosus), coral larvae, adult coral,
shrimp larvae, and fish larvae (Pseudochromis fridmani, Orchid Dottyback). Cuprous oxide is much more toxic than ionic copper. Nanoparticles of Cu2O (~10 nanometer) were
about an order of magnitude more toxic than micro-particles (~30 micrometer). The
second phase was an examination of the level of toxicity and contamination of several
coral reef sites that contained or had nearby permanent mooring sites. Porewater toxicity and Toxicity Identification Evaluation indicated that over 90% of the toxicity resulted
from the two major antifoulant ingredients. Antifoulant paint from small water craft poses
a serious threat to coral reefs. Active management of antifoulant paint, small water craft
and environmental mooring buoys is necessary to mitigate the damage done to reefs.

Cnidarians perceive their environment and respond through their innate immune system
by recognizing ligands and molecular patterns. Transcriptional evidence underlying
immune priming by recurrent bacterial challenges within the anemone, Exaiptasia pallida
identified an ionotropic glutamate receptor (iGluR) as a highly differentiated protein
among immune challenged anemones. iGluRs are transmembrane ion channels involved
in invertebrate chemosensing and plant iGluR-homologs are implicated in sensing pathogen- and damage-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs, DAMPs) that act together
for hosts to differentiate pathogenic-damaging microbes from beneficial or harmless
microbes. To infer the evolution and characterize the molecular function of a proposed
cnidarian-specific iGluR, phylogenetic analyses were conducted using the full coding
synaptic-involved NMDA, kainate, or AMPA ligands. In silico analysis identified potential
phylogeny of iGluRs, and has retained molecular characteristics to respond to chemical
stimuli. Based on this, we postulate that iGluRs may mediate PAMP-triggered immunity
via calcium channels by pattern-recognition particles. These findings provide the foundation for further functional analysis to understand the role of cnidarian iGluRs.


BUILDING MARINE PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT CAPACITY AT PRIORITY CORAL REEF SITES IN THE CARIBBEAN REGION (Abstract ID: 29559)


Over the past five years, a successful capacity building partnership has been established
between 30 ecologically-connected marine protected areas (MPAs) in the wider Caribbean region, NOAA’s Coral Reef Conservation Program and the Gulf and Caribbean
88

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Caribbean reef decline has prompted the listing of the coral genus Acroporaas threatened (ESA) and led to the development of active restoration techniques to facilitate
recovery. Expanding efforts demand a better understanding of the genetic drivers of
coral growth and survivorship and the implications of active intervention on genetic and
genotypic diversity on multiple scales. We describe the use of Genotyping by Sequencing to formulate and resolve genetic questions about Acropora cervicornisrestoration and
conservation in Florida. GBS provides more markers per individual than conventional
molecular techniques, enabling a holistic understanding of factors relevant to restoration
such as population structure, genotypic diversity within reefs, and genetic diversity of
including high diversity of wild corals and three genetically distinct populations. GBS
also highlights large genetic/genotypic diversity within reefs and thickets, suggesting
adaptive variation over small distances and providing key information for the development of nursery propagated thicket outplanting. Finally, substantial genetic and genotypic diversity in existing nursery stocks is reflected in variable performance in situ and
suggests the high diversity of wild and outplanted coral assemblages tempers concerns
of reduced fitness due to outplanting. GBS should be incorporated into the restoration
‘toolbox’ as an important metric for understanding the effects of intervention.

Fisheries Institute. The initiative began with the selection of 10 Caribbean countries to
participate in an assessment of MPA management capacity. The assessment applied
a new tool for a guided self-evaluation of management capacity by MPA managers
covering 25 aspects of MPA management and systematically assessing capacity on a
three-tiered scale. Our approach to capacity building has been to facilitate peer to peer
learning, strategically targeting the highest priority management needs identified in the
capacity assessment. We have formed a learning network of MPA managers and professionals to address needs identified by each MPA through a variety of means, including
regional peer to peer workshops, direct technical support, site to site learning exchanges
and competitive grants. To date, the partnership has addressed sustainable financing,
enforcement, strategic management planning and implementation, outreach and communications, and socio-economic monitoring, while establishing a close-knit network
between coral reef MPA managers and organizations with MPA management expertise.
Exchanges between the Caribbean and Pacific, and cooperation with other donors and
expert partners, have been effective in further building capacity. Site-specific follow-up is
helping MPAs increase their management capacity on top priority needs.

THE INFLUENCE OF CO2 ON CALCIFICATION IN CORAL CELL CULTURES
(Abstract ID: 29534)


Understanding the cellular and molecular responses of stony corals to ocean acidification
is key to predicting their ability to maintain calcification under high CO2 conditions.
Biomineralization toolkit proteins have been proposed for several corals and elucidating
the connection between expression of these genes and calcification will allow a better
understanding of their roles in the mineralization process. We analyzed cell cultures of
the stony coral, Stylophora pistillata, by microscopy, qPCR, western blot, and mass spectrometry to test the effects of increased CO2 on the calcification process at the cellular
CO2 re-aggregate into proto-polyps and precipitate CaCO3. When grown at high and
several highly acidic proteins as well as a carbonic anhydrase, but down-regulate longterm
cadherin protein production and minimize proto-polyp formation; this coincides with a
medium rather than in a calicoblastic space. These results suggest that coral cells possess
compensatory molecular machinery to deal with ocean acidification. However, the ability
of these molecular mechanisms alone to compensate for very high CO2 appears limited.

CLONALITY AND LOCAL DISPERSAL: MAJOR COMPONENTS IN POPULATION
MAINTENANCE OF FIRE CORALS IN MOOREA REEFS (Abstract ID: 28586)
Asexual reproduction is commonly thought to decrease evolutionary fitness by reducing
genetic diversity in populations. Assessing levels of clonality in reef-building organisms is
thus crucial to understand population maintenance and resilience of coral reefs. Although
Millepora hydrocorals are a ubiquitous component of tropical reefs, information regarding
ecological processes driving their population dynamics is still lacking. We investigated
whether and how the level of clonality varies in Millepora platyphylla populations in five
habitats with varying wave energy. We used 12 microsatellite markers to genotype 3651
georeferenced colonies. The great majority of colonies are clones (>72% up to 97%) where
wave energy is high (upper slope) and where waves and resultant coral fragments disperse
(back, fringing and patch reefs). Clonality is reduced (<60%) on the mid slope where wave
energy is lower. Relatively high levels of genetic diversity were estimated in all populations,
although 328 clonal lineages (~30% of the 1064 multi-locus genotypes) were identified over
the five surveyed habitats. Clones of the same lineage were dispersed among habitats with
six clonal lineages that strongly demonstrated morphological plasticity among clones in
response to wave energy. Parentage analyses provided the first evidence of larval retention
that clonal propagation combined with phenotypic plasticity and local larvae dispersal is
highly successful for population maintenance of fire corals in a marginal reef.



RESOLVING MECHANISMS OF LOCALIZED ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE: A
CLOSER LOOK AT OCEAN DYNAMICS IN THE VERDE ISLAND PASSAGE DURING THE 1998 BLEACHING EVENT (Abstract ID: 29592)
Known as the “center of the center” for marine biodiversity, the Verde Island Passage
(VIP; Philippines) is valued for its abundance of reef fish and coral species. In 1998,
anomalously warm sea surface temperatures (SSTs) associated with the El Niño/La
Niña resulted in widespread coral bleaching in the Coral Triangle. However, satellite
(CORTAD) data indicate that SST anomalies were less extreme in certain regions,
observation, we use a high (500m) resolution Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS)
model of the VIP from 1996-1999, which includes sub-mesoscale features and previously unresolved vertical structure in this relatively narrow passage. Lower SST anomalies in the VIP appear attributable to strong, seasonal surface currents that cool surface
conditions through significant island upwelling and mixing resultant from interactions
with internal tides. These findings suggest that the VIP’s configuration renders it less
susceptible to thermal stress incurred by climatic events such as ENSO 1998, highlight
the spatial heterogeneity of physical quantities in this geographically complex region,
and emphasize the importance of higher-resolution models when anticipating individual
ecosystems’ vulnerability to climate variability and change.

FORE REEF SPUR AND GROOVE GROWTH AND IMPLICATIONS FOR REEF
PLATFORM EVOLUTION (Abstract ID: 28873 | Poster ID: 386)
Coral reefs protect islands and coastlines around the world from the effects of waves and
storms. The spur and groove (SaG) zone is a characteristic geomorphic zone occurring
on the seaward slope of modern reefs globally. Given the location of SaGs at the seaward
fringe of modern reef flats, the direction, rates and mechanisms of SaG formation and
growth are critical to understanding reef platform development throughout the Holocene
and into the Anthropocene. Our recent research shows the existence of several types of
SaGs primarily related to wave energy exposure (both intensity and direction). Here we
investigate the formation and evolution of different types of SaGs in the southern Great
Barrier Reef (One Tree and Heron Reefs, Australia) and French Polynesia (Moorea).
A total of 46 short cores (< 70 cm long) were obtained using a pneumatic drill at ten
locations; drilling was undertaken on top of spurs, into spur walls and into groove floors in
a planimetric layout across the zone. We present down-core sedimentologic, coralgal assemblage and calibrated 14C AMS age data from SaG features in high, moderate, and low
wave energy settings. Preliminary data reveal that high energy spur features in Moorea
are typically younger (maximum age 762-945 cal BP) than lower energy spur features in
the southern Great Barrier Reef (maximum age 4134-4445 cal BP). Vertical and lateral
accretion patterns obtained at these three sites also differ; these patterns are currently
under investigation taking into account the dominant energy regime, regional sea-level
and reef growth histories.


GENTOYPING BY SEQUENCING AS A TOOL FOR UNDERSTANDING GENETIC
AND GENOTYPIC PATTERNS OF ACROPORA CERVICORNISRESTORATION
(Abstract ID: 28176)

89

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM



CLIMATE CHANGE STUDIES CAN DIRECT RESTORATION TECHNIQUES TO
ENHANCE CORAL REEF RESILIENCE (Abstract ID: 29508 | Poster ID: 470)

EVALUATING PATTERNS OF GENE FLOW IN THE PRECIOUS CORALSHEMICORALLIUM IMPERIALE/LAAUENSE ACROSS THE PACIFIC OCEAN (Abstract ID:
28804 | Poster ID: 329)

By year 2100, the carbonate chemistry of the world’s oceans will be profoundly different,
yet little is known about how the stress of ocean warming and acidification will influence
coral restoration efforts. At Mote we are currently outplanting thousands of Pseudodiploria clivosa andOrbicella faveolata fragments each year in our efforts to restore Florida’s
to address which species and genotypes are most resistant to thermal stress combined
with ocean acidification. We measured changes in physiological performance in a fullfactorial experimental design with three pHT treatments (control 8.01, mid-century 7.79,
and end of century 7.68), distributed between two temperatures (30°C and 27°C) for two
genotypes of each species and for two different fragment sizes. After two months, there
were no significant differences in net calcification due to temperature or pH conditions;
however, there was a significant effect of species (p > 0.0062) and genotype (p > 0.0076)
this project greatly improves our ability to predict which coral species and genotypes are
likely to persist under chronic environmental change and adjust restoration practices to
maximize reef resilience.

Soft barriers, as are oceanic currents and large distances between populations, have
been considered biogeographical filters rather than physical barriers. Their sporadically
permeability shows that dispersal is the main mechanism responsible for biogeographic
patterns, but their role in the diversification of marine taxa is not completely understood.
Hemicorallium sp. have broad distributions throughout the Pacific Ocean. Recent studies
are indistinguishable by molecular and morphological methods. Using three populations
Ocean (SO), we evaluated the potential role of geographic distance and the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) in structuring gene flow patterns for these deep-sea
octocorals. For this purpose, we obtained 75 sequences from three mitochondrial genes
and used a combination of population genetics and phylogenetics methods. Shared
no genetic differentiation between SP and SO, however NP had significant genetic differentiation when compared to the other two population; the highest value against the
distance. These preliminary results suggest that the ACC has no effect in the genetic
respond to a scenario of isolation by distance.

au

GREEN TURTLE REPRODUCTIVE FAILURE AND MANAGEMENT INTERVENTION AT RAINE ISLAND, GREAT BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 30153)


Raine Island is the world’s largest green turtle rookery. The future of this population is
under threat. Mortality of adult female nesters is up to 2000 individuals in a peak season.
Nesting and hatching failure are also occurring on a grand scale. Nesting success is low,
around 20%, due to two main causes. Dry sand causes nest collapse and high-density
nesting results in frequent inter-turtle nesting disturbance. Re-nesting efforts deplete
stored energy reserves and result in fewer clutches laid in a season. Emergence success
is low, from 20 – 56%, with embryonic death mostly occurring in early development.
Tidal inundation at nest level is widespread and is being investigated as a major cause of
hatching failure. With very low hatching success producing a large decomposing biomass
there is concern that unsuitable nest environment conditions may also be contributing
to hatching failure. Trial re-profiling of the nesting area was carried out in 2014. This
produced a more gradual slope and raised height above inundation level within the
nesting area. Comparison of trial and control nesting beach areas showed an increase in
nesting success (47% vs 26%), more even distribution and reduced disturbance of nesting turtles and increased hatchling production within the trial area. Comparison of nests
marked by dGPS and excavated post-hatching however showed no difference between
trial and control areas with an average emergence success of 56%. This indicates that
hatching failure occurs above inundation level and that inundation is not the sole cause
of hatching failure.

EASTER ISLAND (RAPA NUI) CORALS TRACK 19TH AND 20TH CENTURY
DECADAL AND LONGER PERIOD VARIANCE IN SE PACIFIC SEA SURFACE
TEMPERATURES (Abstract ID: 29937)
The southeastern subtropical Pacific has been implicated in the modulation of the El
Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) over decadal time scales, yet this region is almost
entirely devoid of high-resolution paleoclimate archives, making analysis of such climate
connections difficult. Here we present 3 new coral stable isotopic records from Easter
found throughout the three cores, but the use of multiple transects, U/Th dating, and
replication across cores has allowed us to develop credible chronologies and replicated
isotopic time series. Our primary finding is that Easter Island coral del 18O closely tracks
Southern Hemisphere and global instrumental SST during the 20th century. We furthermore suggest that the SST rise associated with global anthropogenic forcing may have
been underestimated in this sector of the ocean. We observe multi-decadal variability
in the seasonal amplitude of Easter Island coral del 18O throughout the time series.
We compare the new Easter Island data sets with previously published coral isotopic
records from the Pacific. All records reveal a similar long-term trend towards warming/
freshening in modern times, suggestive of a basin-scale increase in the strength of the
hydrological cycle. Based on frequency domain analysis and comparisons with other
coral records, we see greatest support for the null hypothesis that basin-wide Pacific
decadal variability arises from the tropics and is expressed in a symmetrical fashion to
the north and south.



VOICE OF THE SEA: USING TELEVISION TO TEACH CORAL REEF SCIENCE
AND PROMOTE STEM CAREERS ACROSS THE PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 29621)

CORAL SKELETAL Δ15N RECORDS PROVIDE A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON
COASTAL CORAL REEFS EUTROPHICATION (Abstract ID: 29131)

Voice of the Sea is an innovative 30-minute, weekly TV show broadcast throughout the
Pacific Region that highlights ocean research and careers in a local context, incorporating traditional knowledge into the STEM cannon and striving to create interest in ocean
science research and careers. Voice of the Sea provides a venue for coral reef researchers to share their work with local audiences—those most affected by and with potentially
the most to gain from increased understanding of current ocean and climate research
in their geographic region. The goal of Voice of the Sea is for viewers to become more
science, technology, engineering, and mathematically (STEM) literate in the context of
ocean and climate issues. Preliminary research indicates significant increases in viewer
interest and understanding of episode content across age groups, with implications for
formal and informal communication of science topics. We will share excerpts of Voice
of the Sea coral reef research episodes and audience feedback.

Human-driven eutrophication is thought to be a major threat to coastal coral reefs worldwide. Yet, we only have a limited understanding of the causes and the consequences
of this problem, preventing the application of adequate mitigation policies. Indeed, we
lack crucial environmental baselines to identify the sources of nutrients and understand
how these nutrients might have changed the coral reef ecosystem over time. The natural
abundance of nitrogen isotopes in coral skeleton-bound organic matter (CS - δ15N) may
be a promising tool to identify environmental nitrogen (N) sources and to track their
changes over time. Until now, such studies have been prevented by the lack of adequate
methodology, mainly due to the low N content in coral skeleton. A recent study provided
a sensitive and precise method for analysing CS- δ15N (Wang et al., 2015), paving the
way for a new field of investigation. To further explore the ability of the CS - δ15N to
track human-driven eutrophication we have generated two annually-resolved CS - δ15N
records from cores collected in historically eutrophic places: Guam USA, (56 years) and
90

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Hong Kong SAR (150 years). These two cases revealed that the CS - δ15N recorded
significant changes in the N sources on decadal to centennial scales, in response to
increasing human activities. The two records showed that sewage-derived N has been
present in the environment for more than 50 years. Although these records come from
hand-picked locations, they suggest that some coastal reefs worldwide could have been
under eutrophication stress for half a century.

middle of the water column during the day but more variability and no distinct pattern
within the water column at night. These results indicate clear spatial variability, not just
patchiness of zooplankton, and suggest further research is needed for plankton dynamics
on coral reefs to better understand heterotrophy as a recovery mechanism for bleaching
corals. As zooplankton are a critical source of energy to corals, and many other species
in coral reef ecosystems, it is important to understand the dynamics of zooplankton on
coral reefs to aid in their recovery from potentially negative consequences of a changing
climate.


INFLUENCE OF CORAL REEF STRUCTURE ON BEHAVIOR OF CARIBBEAN
HERBIVOROUS FISHES (Abstract ID: 29890 | Poster ID: 585)


Grazing activity of herbivorous fishes are essential for resilience of coral reefs. Their
specific feeding preferences on turf, crustose and standing fleshy algae complement each
other and provide an effective overall control on algal assemblages of coral reefs. However, it’s been shown that grazing activity of herbivores can be influenced by resource
availability and habitat structure. In this study we evaluated feeding habits and behavior
of herbivorous fishes in two distinct Florida reefs, Molasses reef and Conch reef. We
characterized fish communities of both sites using 30x2 m lineal transects (n=20) and
surveyed benthic community using photo-quadrats (n=200/site). To study fish behavior,
we followed target species for 10 minutes (n=156/reef) and recorded interactions and
grazing activity of eight parrotfishes. Molasses is a high relief reef with higher density
and biomass of herbivorous fish as well as greater abundance of crustose algae and
turf-forming species. Conch has lower rugosity with half of the benthos covered by turf
algae associated with sediment (TAS) and other 30% dominated by brown upright algae.
We found large variability species feeding preferences between both sites. At Conch
approximately 50% of fish bites targeted TAS while at Molasses this benthic group was
contacted less that 20% of the time. Contrarily, turf, crustose algae and corals were
greatly more consumed at Molasses apparently caused of higher resource availability.
We found that parrotfish interact more often at Molasses but and spend more time
camouflaging at Conch reef. We discussed the implication of these results for coral reef
functioning and management strategies.

HERITABILITY AND GENOMIC BASIS FOR VARIATION IN THERMAL TOLERANCE OF THE CORAL HOLOBIONT IN ORBICELLA FAVEOLATA(Abstract ID:
29877 | Poster ID: 29)
Sea surface temperatures are predicted to rise 1-2C by the end of the century, and
thermally sensitive organisms like reef-building corals will require substantial adaptive
responses in order to persist well into the future. Genetic variation that might support
adaptive responses has been documented in larval stages of some corals, but the contribution of genetic variation of adult corals and its functional basis remains unclear. In this
study, we focus on mechanisms that may enable long-term adaptation by investigating
heritable variation in thermal tolerance and its genomic basis in Orbicella faveolata, a
dominant reef-builder in the Caribbean. Thermal stress experiments were conducted
at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Bocas del Toro, Panama, using coral
fragments collected from natural populations. Bleaching responses were quantified
and combined with genome-wide SNP genotyping to estimate heritability and test for
associations between thermal tolerance and genotypes. Using the linkage map and draft
genome assembly for this species, we searched for genomic regions underlying variation
within more thermally tolerant phenotypes. We profiled transcriptional responses in
the same corals to evaluate whether genomic regions associated with tolerance include
genes differentially expressed in heat-tolerant and susceptible genotypes. Integrating
genomic and transcriptomic data with quantitative genetic analysis provides a new
perspective on the mechanistic basis for thermal tolerance phenotypes and the potential
for adaptation to rising ocean temperatures.



FACTORS CONTROLLING SHORELINE CHANGES IN THE NORTHERN TUAMOTU REEF ISLANDS, FRENCH POLYNESIA (Abstract ID: 28598)
This study provides new data on shoreline changes on 111 reef islands of 4 atolls of the
Tuamotu archipelago, French Polynesia (Rangiroa, Tikehau, Takaroa and Mataiva), over
a 33- to 52-year period characterised by rising sea levels (+2.5 to 2.9 mm y-1). Results
show that 75.7% of the islands were in stable condition while 16.8% expanded and 7.5%
contracted. Accretion occurred across all island sizes and atoll sides, with the highest
rates (>10%) occurring on highly modified islands as a result of land reclamation and
of the disruption of sediment transport by causeways and transversal coastal structures.
Eighty-two per cent of the islands that have decreased in area are less than 5 ha; most
of them are undisturbed by human activities and located on the windward side of atolls.
Twelve per cent of the islands have migrated, either lagoonward or oceanward. Three
factors contributing to shoreline change are investigated: human factors, sediment supply,
and tropical and extra-tropical cyclones. Although they erode islands (with shoreline retreat exceeding 30m in places), cyclones also increase their elevation; after such events,
beach resilience occurs over a 10 to 20-year period. The good state and high resilience
of coral reefs after destruction, mainly by cyclones, suggests that natural reef islands may
continue to be resilient in the next decades. On the contrary, most developed islands
have lost their capacity to grow both outwards and upwards. Their situation is therefore
concerning in the face of accelerated sea-level rise.

TWO YEARS AND COUNTING: MONITORING AND DOCUMENTING THE ONGOING GLOBAL CORAL BLEACHING EVENT (2014-2016 AND BEYOND) (Abstract
ID: 28819)


Regional- to global-scale coral bleaching events have been occurring for more than 30
years. In that time, bleaching has worsened as global ocean temperatures warmed. Unlike the bleaching events in 1983 and 1998, strong El Niüo/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
conditions are no longer needed to cause widespread bleaching but certainly can exacerbate bleaching. The current global bleaching event began in Guam and the Northern
Mariana Islands in mid-2014 (following 2013 bleaching there). Thermal stress brought
bleaching back to previously impacted reefs and reached areas largely missed by past
Florida) or prolonged stress that may last over a year (Kiribati). With the strong 2015-16
ENSO, bleaching may continue through much of 2016 in the Pacific and Indian Oceans
and return to the Caribbean. It may even continue into 2017, and will likely spread
even more broadly if a strong La Niüa develops. Unfortunately, some key international
monitoring efforts (Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network, ReefBase) are no longer fully
functional. This places greater pressure on other international (Reef Check, XL Catlin

SPATIAL COMPARISONS OF ZOOPLANKTON ABUNDANCE ON CORAL REEFS
IN BOCAS DEL TORO, PANAMA (Abstract ID: 29686 | Poster ID: 358)
Climate change is increasing the decline of coral reef health as rising temperatures result
in coral bleaching, often leading to death. Increased heterotrophy has recently been
identified as a potential recovery mechanism for certain corals. This study investigates
the abundance of zooplankton communities over a large spatial scale (km) across reefs
in Bocas del Toro, Panama, to further investigate how heterotrophy may aid in recovery
from bleaching. Zooplankton were collected at three depths in both offshore and nearshore reefs, using tows during the day and traps set on the substrate at night to include
vertical migration. Nearshore reefs show higher total abundance of zooplankton in
comparison to offshore reefs throughout the entire water column. During the day, abundance differs by less than two-fold, whereas at night abundance differs by over an order
of magnitude. Additionally, both sites show increased zooplankton abundance in the

91

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

with decreasing hydrodynamics. Additionally, the negatively correlated number of operculinid chambers apparently changes along the hydrodynamic gradient. Both characters
were used as the most significant metric characters in the evolution of Heterostegina.
conditions. Therefore, paleogeographical differences leading to subspecies together
with transport, reworking and time-averaging possibly lead to erroneous interpretations
of evolutionary lineages. Using growth-independent and growth-invariant characters
describing the internal test morphology completely allows a much better interpretation
of evolutionary tendencies separated from paleogeographic diversification.

event. NOAA’s Coral Reef Watch is coordinating global data collection and analysis of
this event to make sure key scientific information is not lost. This presentation discusses
the latest satellite and field data on the ongoing global bleaching event and its impacts
on coral reefs worldwide.

SPATIAL AND HOST-GENETIC FORCES STRUCTURE THE MICROBIOME OF
THE SPONGE CLIONA DELITRIX (Abstract ID: 29669)
Sponges are important members of benthic communities throughout the world. They
host diverse symbiont communities with compositions that are largely species-specific
and structured by host evolutionary history. However, little is known about how microbiomes vary among spatially distributed populations within a species. In the current study,
relation to genetic differentiation and habitat location. Sponge samples from four distinct
populations in the Caribbean were collected, and 16S rRNA amplicons were Illuminabased sequenced as part of the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP). Our analysis revealed
that microbial diversity was consistent among all locations and populations, while both
