genetic and environmental forces influenced the microbial composition of sponges.
Caribbean, with 62 microbial taxa found in at least 85% of all samples. Most of these
microbial taxa structured by both host-genetic and environmental forces, while maintaining a core group of microbial symbiont taxa reflective of broader host evolution.


DECADAL TRANSITION IN CORAL REEF STATUS, DISTRIBUTION, ISSUES AND
CONSERVATION INITIATIVES IN GULF OF MANNAR, SOUTHEASTERN INDIA
(Abstract ID: 29196)
The coral reefs of Gulf of Mannar are distributed around 21 islands and show resilience
after complete halt of mining in 2005 and other conservation initiatives. Considerable
awareness and capacity building, coral rehabilitation, protection and livelihood support
has been provided to coastal communities after the major Indian Ocean coral bleaching
event in 1998, and live coral cover increased from 37% in 2005 to 43% in 2009. Though
there was loss of 10% live coral in 2010 due to prolonged elevated sea surface temperature (32oC) resulting bleaching and mortality, the reefs showed resilience to reach
39% live coral cover in 2015. Coral recruitment density increased significantly from
0.65 to 0.86 no/m2 between 2005 and 2015 and more recruits dominated by genera
like Acropora, Montipora, Pocillopora, Porites, and Turbinaria. Recruits are occupying
the nearby sandy and seagrass areas, and in Vaan Island, live coral cover area increased
from 2.75 to 3.5 km2. The coral communities shifted from dominance, for example from
of exotic seaweed, diseases, poaching reef associated ornamental fishes and elevated
temperature pose challenge to reef managers. Over 1.2 Km2 reef area was affected by
exotic seaweed invasion. Tissue loss disease (white syndrome) and growth anomalies
along with several types of lesions was noted in 9% of the corals in 2015. The intensity
of 2016 coral bleaching is alarming. To address the issues and to maintain reef health,
regular monitoring, coral rehabilitation, capacity building, and community involvement
programmes are implemented.


REEF ECOLOGY – REEF ISLAND CONNECTIVITY ON HUVADHU ATOLL RIM,
MALDIVES (Abstract ID: 28321)
Coral reef islands are low-lying (typically <3 m above MSL) accumulations of bioclastic
sediment produced by the surrounding coral reefs. Given their low elevations and reliance upon locally generated sediment, they are regarded among the most vulnerable
environments to sea-level rise. Understanding the linkages between reef ecology and
reef islands is thus crucial for assessing future island resilience. Here, we present a
holistic study of reef ecology-reef island linkages within a section of Huvadhu Atoll rim.
This is the first detailed study of marine-island connectivity to be undertaken in an atoll
rim setting in the Maldives. Sediment production rates were quantified using ecological
survey data of sediment producers. Connectivity was assessed through comparisons of
marine, beach, and island (from a series of cores) sediment samples (n = 157). Estimated
annual sediment production was 382,000 kg across an area of 1.3 km2. Sediment
production rates ranged from 0.05 kg m-2 yr-1 in the oceanward sand zone to 0.84 kg
m-2 yr-1 on the lagoonward reef crest. Excavating parrotfish were identified as the
dominant sediment producers, accounting for 79.4% of production. Marine, beach and
island sediments were dominated by sand-grade coral (63%, 61%, 74% respectively).
As parrotfish are the most likely source of sand-grade coral, this reflects the reliance of
rim island systems on a limited range of sediment producers. Hence, ecological shifts
associated with environmental change may have a critical impact upon future reef island
vulnerability in the face of sea-level rise.



A CHARACTERIZATION OF THE SPATIAL PATTERNS OF SCLERACTINIAN CORALS AT PALMYRA ATOLL (Abstract ID: 29922 | Poster ID: 552)
Coral reefs are spatially complex habitats, yet our understanding of their non-equilibrium
dynamics is largely based upon percent cover data using imagery of limited scale (< 1
m2). However, ecological processes leading to differences in the spatial patterns of individual coral colonies cannot be detected from percent cover based analyses. As a result,
we lack a robust and highly taxonomically resolved appreciation of landscape-scale
patterning in coral reef environments. Here we investigate the spatial patterns of hard
coral assemblages at Palmyra Atoll using large scale photomosaic images, each covering
100 m2 of benthic habitat. All individual coral colonies were mapped and identified to the
lowest taxonomic level possible, and using spatial-analytical techniques we investigated
departures from spatial randomness. While patterns of dispersion were variable, all taxa
showed some degree of clustering. Despite this, the distributions of a number of taxa did
not significantly depart from randomness. We did not observe over-dispersion in any of
the observed taxa. Further for many taxa, the level of clustering was linearly related to
abundance, suggesting density dependence in dispersion. These patterns, at least partially,

PALEO-GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSIFICATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEPENDENCE OF THE LARGER FORAMINIFER HETEROSTEGINA (Abstract ID: 27868)
The worldwide distributed larger benthic foraminifer (LBF) Heterostegina prefers oligotrophic environments in tropic and warm temperate seas. Harboring diatoms enables
weather wave base Heterostegina protects entrainment by living in holes of structured
boulders. The dependence on light intensities is managed by increasing surface/volume
ratios correlated with decreasing light. The dependence on hydrodynamics leads to a
shift in proportions between schizonts (smaller proloculi) and gamonts (larger proluculi)
along the hydrodynamic gradient. The dominance of schizonts in high energetic environments, the mixture between schizogony and gametogony and the dominance of gamonts
in low energetic environments leads to an apparently gradual increase of proloculus size

92

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

merous challenges, this project utilized high resolution World View-2 satellite imagery to
provide seamless regional shallow water bathymetry and benthic habitat data and maps
for nearshore waters around Timor Leste. Prolonged high turbidity on the southeast and
portions of the northeast coasts resulted in poor visibility and limited usability of some
of the satellite images. The lack of relevant bathymetric and benthic habitat groundtruthing data has also been problematic. We addressed these issues by continuously
adapting data processing methods to the quality of each satellite image. Here we present
an overview of our seafloor depth derivation and habitat characterization methodology,
which we use to obtain partially complete bathymetric data coverage and complete benthic habitat data coverage for the shallow (0-20 m) coastal seafloor around Timor Leste.
These data layers are an integral part of the EAFM under development for Timor Leste.

result from important biological processes such as differences in reproductive strategies.
The data provided by photomosaics allows us to not only quantify ecosystem state, but
also identify patterns in spatial structure, which can lead to critical inferences about the
underlying processing structuring a variety of natural systems including coral reefs.

IMPLEMENTATION OF LARGE SCALE MONITORING PROGRAMS AS A PLATFORM FOR TERRITORIAL CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID:
28352)


Development and implementation of large spatial scale monitoring programs is a
complex process requiring advance planning and strong partnerships. Project goals
include, building a scientifically sound monitoring platform that compliments current local monitoring efforts within a territory by providing broader spatial resolution to further
assist in the management of local resources. When working remotely, resources and
personnel become precious commodities, therefore proper planning and coordinating
well before implementation is pertinent for execution. The National Coral Reef Monitoring Program (NCRMP) is one such example; a strategic framework funded by NOAA’s
Coral Reef Conservation Program (CRCP) for conducting sustained observations of
presentation will focus on the development of the biological monitoring plan for Puerto
Rico by providing a road map of capacity building and leveraging of resources within the
territory wherever possible. Current effort within Puerto Rico include federal, territorial
and NGO partners and coalesces these groups to work collectively on a common objective. Integration of NCRMP data into local research and management plan development
within the North East Reserve (NER) will be highlighted to emphasize the synergy of this
new monitoring program and augmenting local resource management and conservation.

CORAL-ALGAL COMPETITION INDICATES A NEGATIVE IMPACT OF LAND
RUNOFF FROM RURAL COMMUNITIES ON CORAL REEFS IN FIJI (Abstract ID:
29749)
Coral-algal competition is ubiquitous in coral reefs worldwide and has the potential to
provide a useful snapshot of the state of the benthos. The majority of people in Small
Island Developing States live along the coast, yet little is known about the effects of
runoff from these communities on coral reefs. Here, we investigated the abundance,
composition and apparent outcome of different types of coral−algae competitive
interactions on lagoonal reefs in Fiji. Surveys were conducted at three sites with increasing distance from each of two rural villages. Data also included monitoring of water
quality and herbivorous fish biomass. Findings revealed that declining water quality was
correlated with an increase in contacts between turf algae and corals. Macroalgae were
generally better competitors than corals, suggesting an ongoing community shift towards
algal dominance. The most common macroalga in contact with corals was Lobophora
being lost by the coral. Furthermore, herbivorous fish biomass decreased in proximity to
villages, potentially as a result of high amounts of sediment trapped in algae. This study
suggests that rural communities can shift the competitive advantage of corals towards
algae, potentially initiating a transition towards algal dominance. It further underlines the
importance of water quality management in Small Island Developing States so that they
can continue to receive the benefits from the ecosystem services they rely on.


REEF FISH AS POTENTIAL LINKS ACROSS HABITATS IN A BRAZILIAN TROPICAL SEASCAPE (Abstract ID: 28754)
Seascape connectivity is regarded as essential for healthy reef fish communities in tropical shallow systems. Seagrass beds and mangroves often constitute important nursery
habitats, with high structural complexity, supplying juvenile fish with food and protection
from predation. The Brazilian seascape is considerably different from the Caribbean
and Indo-Pacific shallow seascapes, particularly regarding seagrass beds, which in
Brazil cover small areas and have very low structural complexity. Macroalgal beds may
therefore be of more importance as nursery habitat for juvenile coral reef fishes in Brazil.
Here, we investigate the extent to which fish communities demonstrate habitat connectivity and identify possible nurseries in a Brazilian seascape within three shallow reef
systems. Fish communities were surveyed on the fore reef, back reef, in seagrass beds
and Sargassum-dominated algal beds. Seagrass beds contained very low abundances
and species richness of fish, while algal beds contained significantly more juveniles than
all other habitats, including species that are found on the reef as adults. Fish species
associated exclusively with seagrass were not observed. Connectivity and thus pathways
of nutrient transfer seem to function differently in Brazil compared to the Caribbean and
Indo-Pacific, with Sargassum-dominated beds being important as nurseries for a larger
number of species than mangroves and seagrass beds. Results suggest that macroalgal
beds are important nursery grounds for many reef fish species, thereby functionally
structuring the adult coral-reef fish community.


INTEGRATED GENOMIC RESOURCES FOR A TEMPERATE MODEL OF CNIDARIAN-ALGAL SYMBIOSIS (Abstract ID: 29879 | Poster ID: 30)
Corals support diverse reef ecosystems, but are declining because of rising ocean temperatures which disrupt symbiosis between corals and diverse algal symbionts (genus
Symbiodinium). The symbiont types hosted by corals contribute to thermal tolerance
of the holobiont, yet the mechanisms underlying maintenance and loss of symbiosis
remain poorly understood. These studies are difficult in coral because of their thermal
sensitivity, restricted distributions, and cryptic variation in symbiont types. We are building genomic resources for a temperate anemone Anthopleura elegantissima that provides
variation in visually distinct symbiotic states, associating with a green alga (Elliptochloris
marina), a dinoflagellate (Symbiodinium sp.), and occurs in an aposymbiotic state. Maintenance of associations in the thermally dynamic intertidal zone and across a wide latitudinal range is a contrast to the more thermally sensitive associations in corals. To establish
genomic resources for this model, we collected anemones across their geographic range
and conducted genome-wide SNP genotyping to select a relatively homozygous colony
the chosen accession. Here we describe genome assembly and annotation, genomic patterns of population differentiation across the US west coast, and our efforts to develop
and integrate a genetic linkage map, transcriptome, and genome assemblies.


WORLDVIEW-2 SATELLITE MAPPING OF THE NEARSHORE ECOSYSTEMS
AROUND TIMOR LESTE: GOALS, CHALLENGES AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS
(Abstract ID: 29124 | Poster ID: 537)
Timor Leste and the Coral Triangle region in general represent a hotspot of marine
biodiversity. Coral reefs in the region provide an important source of food and income
for local economies and provide coastal protection from storm and tsunami events.
Triangle region, have been providing technical assistance to support implementation of
an Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM) in Timor Leste. Despite nu-


BENTHIC COVER INFLUENCES THE PRESENCE OF CORAL RECRUITS WHILE
NOT AFFECTING THEIR ABUNDANCE (Abstract ID: 28501)

93

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

further evidence for the combined effects of geographic distance and environmental
distance in explaining genetic variance, even in a single biogeographic region.

Corals pass through three steps to recruit successfully: (1) larval production and dispersal; (2) settlement and (3) post settlement survival. The last two steps are influenced
positively and negatively by benthic organisms such as algae and bryozoans. Common
methods to quantify recruitment hinder conclusions on which step leads to recruitment
failure because they measure recruits that pass through all steps. This study, based at
Palmyra Atoll, combined recruitment data with a water flow model and measures of
coral and benthic cover to determine if recruitment is driven by larvae supply or the benthic cover on the settlement tiles. Adult coral cover and water flow were used as proxies
for larvae supply. We split the data into presence/absence and non-zero abundance for
correlation analysis and modelling. The presence of pocilloporid recruits correlated with
the tile’s benthic cover and its succession stage, adult coral cover, and water flow. It was
modelled by a binary logistic model that included adult pocilloporid cover, water flux
from the lagoon and benthic succession stage. The abundance of pocilloporid recruits
on the tiles correlated with water flow and adult coral cover. It was modelled by an
ordinary logistic regression that included adult coral cover and water flux from coral
dominated sites. Our results indicate that larvae supply and benthic cover on the tile
influence Pocilloporid recruitment. However, the abundance of recruits is almost entirely
dependent on larvae supply. Hence, changes in benthic cover affect recruitment failure
but do not influence recruit abundance.


SPECIES DIVERSITY IN THE MESOPHOTIC CORAL GENUS LEPTOSERIS: A COMBINED TAXONOMIC AND PHYLOGENOMIC ASSESSMENT (Abstract ID: 29144)
Mesophotic coral ecosystems in the Indo-Pacific are often dominated by members of
the genus Leptoseris, particularly in the deepest parts of the mesophotic zone. Although
recent molecular studies have shed light on the species diversity of this genus in the Hawaiian archipelago, the genus remains poorly understood when it comes to other parts
of the Indo-Pacific. Here, we present a comprehensive study into the species diversity,
distribution and ecology of the genus Leptoseris on the Great Barrier Reef and Coral
Sea. We conducted benthic video transects and extensive specimen collections across
a broad depth range (10-125 m depth) at 10 different locations in the region. Through
a combined taxonomic and molecular assessment (of both host and Symbiodinium
diversity) we established initial geographic and ecological patterns of diversity. These
were then further assessed through an in-depth phylogenomic assessment, in which we
sequenced 150 Leptoseris specimens on the Illumina HiSeq platform (using a modified
RAD-seq approach), including representatives from the different taxonomic species
encountered on the Great Barrier Reef and Coral Sea, as well as Hawaii and the Red
Sea. This genome-wide approach successfully resolved existing taxonomic species
this genus across both shallow and mesophotic reefs, and provides a first insight into the
evolutionary relationships of its members across the Pacific


COMPARISON OF GROWTH CURVES OF AGE-BODY LENGTH RELATIONSHIPS
OF THREE POPULATIONS OF SCARUS QUOYI ALONG THE SOUTHEASTERN
COAST OF MINDANAO, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29471 | Poster ID: 256)
The parrotfish Scarus quoyi is ecologically and commercially important and widely distributed species in the Philippine seas. Sagittal otoliths of 161 individuals were analyzed
to determine any differences in populations at spatial scale. Samples were collected from
Pujada Bay, Saragani Bay and Davao Gulf which covers a distance of approximately 300
km within which ecological connection still exists. Age estimates were done by counting
the opaque and translucent bands on the sectioned sagittal otoliths. Size-at-age plot
generated via Von Bertalanffy growth functions showed close to similar growth curves
for 2 of the 3 sites. The exception was Sarangani bay where fish grew faster and reached
larger size than those from the other 2 sites. At maximum age of 9 years, fish samples
in Sarangani bay reached 22 cm in standard length (SL) while 18 cm and 17 cm SL at
age 9 and 8 for Davao Gulf and Pujada Bay, respectively. This 4 to 5cm difference in SL
suggests the possibility of growth rate difference in populations of Scarus quoyi at spatial
scale and a very important indicator for faster recovery or maintenance of reefs.


TERRESTRIAL AND FINE SEDIMENTS NEGATIVELY IMPACT STONY CORAL
HEALTH IN THE US VIRGIN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29981)
Sedimentation can have deleterious impacts on corals and human activities are increasing
rates of fine-grained terrestrial sediment deposition to nearshore environments. However,
information on natural and modified rates of sediment deposition and specific sediment
characteristics that may differentially impact coral health are needed. Rates of trap
deposition of total sediments, and the standard size fractions, carbonate, organic, and
terrigenous sediment components were sampled on approximately monthly intervals over
3-5 years, across a range of coral reef environments in the US Virgin Islands. Along with
these measurements, coral health was assessed as the prevalence of bleaching, disease,
partial colony mortality, total colony impairment (all parameters combined), and coral
cover. There was high variability in rates of sediment deposition but trap accumulation
was highest in nearshore sites and during periods with storm activity, with site-specific
characteristics relating to sediment resuspension during the winter Atlantic swell. Only the
silt-clay and terrigenous sediment components significantly positively correlated with site
average coral bleaching, partial mortality, and overall impairment. For each doubling of
the mg cm-2 day-1 of silt-clay and terrigenous sediment there was a 10-20% increase in
these coral health responses. This suggests that specific sediment characteristics are more
important than total sediment deposition in predicting coral health and provides new
benchmarks for determining coral health impacts from sedimentary studies.


Broad-scale population genetics can reveal population structure across an organism’s
range, which can enable us to determine levels of movement and connectivity. Genetic
variation and differences in genetic diversity on small-scales have been reported in sea
anemones, but nothing is known about their broad-scale population structure, including
those that host anemonefishes, which are increasingly being targeted in the aquarium
trade. In this study, microsatellite markers were used to determine the population structure of the host anemone, Heteractis magnifica, across nine regions in the Indo-Pacific,
ranging from the Red Sea to French Polynesia. More than 280 samples were collected.
In addition, two rDNA markers were used to identify Symbiodinium types in the samples,
and phylogenetic analyses were used to measure their diversity and geographic
three distinct genetic breaks possibly as a result of factors such as geographic distance,
geographic isolation and environmental variation. Symbiodiniumtypes were also affected
by environmental variation and mostly reflected patterns of regional isolation seen in the
a local scale due to the lack of connectivity between clusters. This study also provides


MICRO-CT ANALYSIS REVEALS DEPRESSED NET CALCIFICATION DUE TO
ENHANCED BIOEROSION AND REDUCED ACCRETION OF REEF SUBSTRATA
AT CO2 SEEPS (Abstract ID: 27953)
Ocean acidification (OA) has been experimentally shown to depress the calcification
of some species and to accelerate the bioerosion of carbonate substrata. OA could
94

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

therefore upset the tenuous balance between accretion and erosion, tipping a reef
system towards net habitat loss. Controlled laboratory experiments have advanced this
science but lack the complexity of field settings, where the processes of accretion and
competition, predation, or facilitation, and the net outcome of an OA-altered carbonate
budget may therefore not simply be the sum of its parts. Here, we deployed dead coral
substrata for two years along an OA gradient at two carbon dioxide seeps on reefs in
Papua New Guinea. We used micro-CT to separately quantify the influence of OA on
accretion, macroboring, microboring, and grazing. Macroboring, primarily by annelids,
was significantly enhanced in high CO2 environments, and secondary accretion was
lower at one of the two high CO2 seeps. Grazing and microboring remained unaffected,
despite strong experimental evidence for the OA-enhancement of the latter. Alkalinity
anomaly incubations of these communities confirm a reduction in net calcification under high CO2conditions, providing further evidence that OA will detrimentally influence
the construction and permanence of coral reef habitats.

collectors, therefore exposure to high levels of irradiance increases energetic pressure
on the photosynthetic apparatus, promoting photodamage resulting in severe losses of
photosynthetic activity (photoinhibition). In this study we investigated the variation of the
capacity for photoprotection and repair of 4 species of scleractinian reef-building corals.
Pseudodiploria strigosa showed the highest sensitivity to photodamage acumulation, but
also showed the largest support for photosynthetic repair activity. The symbiont population found in Montastraea cavernosa were from the most robust symbionts in preventing
the accumulation of photodamage, but have the lowest repair activity, resulting in large
levels of photodamage under increasing levels of excessive absorbed energy. Orbicella
photoprotection (self-shading), except under conditions of low pigmentation or rapid cell
loss. We defined two different descriptors that allowed for quantification of differences
in the photoprotective capacity of Symbiodinium in hospite. First, a fast component that
can be assimilated to the NPQ descriptor proposed for green algae and higher plants,
and the second a slower component related to the quenching of F0 in the antenna of
Symbiodinium.



AN ALLOMETRIC APPROACH TO IDENTIFY THE MAIN CORAL REEF BUILDERS WHILE EXPLAINING THEIR DIFFERENTIAL CONTRIBUTION TO REEF
CARBONATE BUDGETS (Abstract ID: 28721)
Scleractinian corals are responsible for building one of the most diverse and productive
marine ecosystems on Earth, the coral reef. Coral-reef survival in tropical oceans for the
last 200 million years has relied on the mutualistic endosymbiosis established between a
simple animal (Phylum Cnidaria, Class Anthozoa) and an unicellular alga, a dinoflagellate, of the genus Symbiodinium. The success of Scleractinian corals in oligotrophic
tropical environments has been attributed to their extraordinary efficiency in collecting
and processing light for carbon fixation, as Symbiodinium photosynthesis significantly
enhances coral calcification and growth, which is critical for the maintenance of the primary framework of coral reefs. However, not all scleractinian corals can be considered
coral reef builders, and many other primary producers in the reef system also have the
ability to calcify. In this contribution, I present an allometric approach that describes the
differential contribution of each photosynthetic calcifier to reef carbonate budgets and
explains why Scleractinian corals are the main carbonate producers, but just a few species can be considered the builders of the coral reef habitat.

ASSESSMENT OF SHARKS CAUGHT BY CORAL REEF FISHERS IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29811)
Removing apex predators like sharks from the wild has cascading effects on the marine
ecosystem. They are considered as keystone species and have experienced decline for
the past decades, resulting in various management planning and educational campaigns
by concerned groups for their population recovery. Despite the reduction in shark fin
production and exports, shark fishery is still on going and largely remains unregulated
and unmonitored. On-going fisheries assessments in several cities/municipalities across
the Philippines under the National Assessment of Coral Reef Environments (NACRE)
Program provided an important opportunity to determine the status of sharks caught
by coral reef fishers in the areas. Focus group discussions (FGDs) and semi-structured
interviews conducted in at least six coastal barangays each in 17 cities/municipalities
were used to evaluate whether the fishers also target sharks. Results show that sharks are
usually caught as by-catch using various fishing gears while fishers in some sites use speargun or modify fishing techniques to deliberately catch them when present. Aside from
their fins, meat and oil, sharks are also being targeted for the aquarium industry. Sharks
are highly vulnerable to overexploitation which prompts the need to increase awareness
as regards the ecological consequences of local extinction in the Philippines, as well as
to improve shark fisheries management.

Coral Reef Studies, Australia


LONG-TERM VARIATION IN CORAL-ASSOCIATED MICROBIAL SYMBIONTS
(Abstract ID: 28265)
Many species of plants and animals harbor unique symbioses with a diverse and
abundant variety of eukaryotic and prokaryotic microorganisms crucial to their health
and functioning. Scleractinian corals are host to a high diversity of microbial symbionts
that include dinoflagellates, protists, fungi, bacteria, archaea and acellular viruses. The
dynamics of these coral-associated communities over long time frames are poorly
known. Microbial communities of tagged Pocillopora acuta colonies were examined
over two years at Orpheus Island, central Great Barrier Reef. Bacterial, archaeal and
fungal diversity will be assessed using amplicon next generation sequencing and any
temporal patterns in diversity or abundance will be discussed. Sampling will be conducted during this summer (2015-2016) to assess initial changes and potential recovery
in coral-associated microbial communities before, during and after a likely bleaching
event. Understanding functional and seasonal changes in the microbial community over
long time frames, as well as throughout a potential major temperature stress event, will
provide insight into how the coral-associated microbiome may be affected by variations
in sea surface temperatures due to future climate-related environmental change, and
how this may influence the health and survival of the coral host.

GENOMIC AND BIOCHEMICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF C-TYPE LECTINS
IN A MODEL CNIDARIAN AND THEIR ROLE IN SYMBIOSIS ESTABLISHMENT
(Abstract ID: 28430 | Poster ID: 106)
The cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis is highly specific: a given host can establish symbiosis with only a subset of Symbiodinium types. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying this specificity remain poorly understood. Several studies have suggested
that recognition of compatible Symbiodinium during symbiosis establishment depends
on the binding of host lectins to glycans on the dinoflagellate cell surface. Using the
anemone Aiptasia as a model system, we have identified several genes encoding
lectin-like proteins that are expressed differentially between symbiotic and aposymbiotic
anemones. One such gene, encoding the C-type-lectin(Ctl)-like protein Ctl1, shows 8-fold
higher expression in aposymbiotic animals. We expressed a recombinant, GST-tagged
Ctl1 in bacteria and found that it binds much more strongly to an incompatible than to a
compatible strain of Symbiodinium in vitro, consistent with a role in the discrimination
between symbiont types. However, eukaryotic Ctl-like proteins may be misfolded after
expression in bacteria, so that we are currently attempting to express recombinant Ctl1
also in a eukaryotic system, the yeast Pichia. In addition, the Aiptasia genome sequence
revealed that Ctl1 is one of a set of related lectins originating from at least six genes in
a tandem array. However, gaps in the sequence have made these loci difficult to resolve.
Using PacBio long sequencing reads, we are now attempting to fill these gaps so as to
define the full diversity of the Aiptasia Ctl proteins, whose binding properties can then
be explored.


PHOTOPROTECTION AND PHOTOSYSTEM II REPAIR OF SYMBIODINIUM
IN HOSPITE FOR FOUR REEF-BUILDING CORALS FROM THE CARIBBEAN
(Abstract ID: 29967 | Poster ID: 48)
Ecological and evolutionary success of scleractinians relies on the symbiotic association
with dinoflagellates from the genus Symbiodinium. Symbiodinium uses solar radiation to
contribute 95% of the metabolic requirements of the holobiont. Corals are efficient light

95

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Bureau, Philippines
Bureau, Philippines

management options in light of current and future political conditions. Focus group
discussions, key-informant interviews and participatory mapping were carried out in
fourteen sample settlements in November 2015 through rapid assessment. Scenario
analysis was applied to draw four plausible trajectories of future change until 2035. The
exploitation rate of marine resources in Maluku Barat Daya has been stable throughout
the past few decades, due to limited access to the market. Traditional and undestructive
fishing gears were still commonly used. While traditional fisheries closure system (sasi) is
the primary form of marine resource management across all settlements, although it has
been strongly influenced by buyers and prices. Social, economic and marine resource
use conditions were varied in the future under four different scenarios. Based on future
prediction, it is important to design the most suitable management option that can
reduce and maintain future environment impacts, while preserve local custom.

STRENGTHENING MARINE PROTECTED AREAS TO CONSERVE MARINE KEY
BIODIVERSITY AREAS IN THE PHILIPPINES – THE MKBA PROJECT (Abstract
ID: 28547)
An evaluation of the management effectiveness of marine protected areas (MPAs) in
the Philippines to address key drivers and pressures identified 3 major challenges in
conservation and management of marine resources. These are (1) inadequate species,
ecosystems and spatial coverage representation, (2) insufficient and unpredictable
funding levels for long-term management, and (3) weak enabling policy framework for
marine biodiversity conservation. The Marine Key Biodiversity Areas (MKBA) Project,
a 5-year project, was designed to address these challenges and uses an integrated ecosystem approach to strengthen the conservation, protection and management of marine
Palawan, Tañon Strait Protected Seascape, Lanuza Bay and Davao Gulf) in partnership
with key national government agencies, national and local conservation non-government
organizations and local government units. The project outcomes include increased management effectiveness of MPAs and MPA Networks, improved financial sustainability
and an established enabling policy framework for marine biodiversity conservation. A
wide range of activities is undertaken in each of the sites to demonstrate site-specific
and integrated approaches for effective marine biodiversity conservation. An important
strategy is combining social, governance and ecological components in scaling up the
management of existing MPAs to form functional networks. Important metric indicators
are used to monitor and evaluate progress of the project.


GLOBAL BIOGEOGRAPHY OF MARINE ALGAE WITH APPLICATIONS FOR
CORAL REEF CONNECTIVITY (Abstract ID: 29568)
The global distribution patterns of marine benthic algae were analyzed with respect to
latitudinal and longitudinal gradients, temperature, spatial scales, taxonomic gradients,
and patterns of endemism. Global presence/absence records of marine algae were
collected from online resources, scientific papers, and gray literature and compiled
into a digital database of 131,400 records, with 52,680 unique species-locality records
occurring after geographic and taxonomic filters. Records were grouped into 155 unique
localities, which were further classified into three temperature regions (temperate, subtropical, and tropical) based on NOAA/NCEP SST data. The Tripartite Similarity Index
was used to measure percent similarity between all locality pairs (excluding the Antarctic
and Arctic localities), with minimal distances between all locality pairwise combinations
calculated by implementation of Dijkstra’s algorithm for shortest path problems along
a modeled connectivity network. Analyses of variance and covariance were used to
ascertain differences in regression patterns between locality records clustered along
temperature, geographic, or taxonomic gradients. Endemism metrics were calculated by
a corrected weighted measure using two methods: as the proportion of range-restricted
species in each 5-degree cell and by localities alone, revealing many regions of endemism ignored previously. Marine algal biodiversity patterns were compared with those
for corals and shore fishes. Connectivity patterns for algae have applications for coral
reef conservation globally and for MPA design.


RESOURCE PARTITIONING AND TROPHIC RELATIONSHIPS OF LARGE PREDATORY FISHES IN A CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEM (Abstract ID: 28720)


Sharks are thought to play an important role in structuring coral reef communities, but
their role may be masked by the high level of functional redundancy. For example, coral
reefs have a high diversity of predatory fishes that could be sharing similar ecological
roles. Therefore, a better understanding the feeding ecology and trophic interactions
of large predatory fishes may help define their role within coral reefs. This study used
stable isotope analyses to examine trophic relationships and niche overlap of common
reef predators in the central Great Barrier Reef. Mean trophic position of reef predators
(sharks and teleosts) increased with body size, with larger sharks having higher trophic
positions than smaller teleosts. However, sharks typically differed in their mean isotopic
values (δ13C and δ15N), and most species examined occupied a relatively unique isotopic niche space. The only exceptions were grey reef (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos) and
web than resident sharks. In contrast, the whitetip reef shark (Triaenodon obesus), a species with strong site-attachment, had similar isotopic niche spaces than smaller teleost
predators (Plectropomus leopardus and Lethrinus miniatus). Our findings suggest that
although reef sharks occupy relatively high trophic positions, larger non-resident species
may be more important in the functioning of coral reef communities.

USING REEF FISH MOVEMENT INFORMATION TO IMPROVE MARINE RESERVE
DESIGN IN POHNPEI, MICRONESIA (Abstract ID: 28039)
Designing reserves must be adequate to ensure the persistence of focal species.
Guidelines recommend that minimum reserve size be informed by species’ home ranges.
We used recently published information on the home ranges of coral reef fishes to
inform the design of marine reserves in Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. Key
species of interest were identified at an initial stakeholder workshop. Communications
products illustrating which species were likely to be afforded protection within existing
reserves were used to facilitate discussions about the efficacy of the reserve system with
stakeholders. Combined with information on management effectiveness, this information
was used to identify which reserves should be prioritised for improving design and/or
management. Almost all reserves were found to be too small to adequately protect key
species of interest. Though legislation makes it difficult to change the boundaries of
existing reserves, recently proposed reserves are larger, and afford greater protection to
key species. Furthermore, communities are considering other mechanisms to improve
reserve design, for example through larger seasonal closures. Previous approaches to determining marine reserve size have been a trade-off between a conservation mantra of
“bigger is better” and social acceptability, with resource users preferring smaller closures.
Our approach of using movement patterns of locally important species to determine
appropriate reserve sizing resonated more with resource users and better engaged them
in the design process.



CONSERVING THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT OF MALUKU BARAT DAYA: A
SCENARIO ANALYSIS OF PAST AND FUTURE TRENDS (Abstract ID: 28665 |
Poster ID: 677)
The recent establishment of Maluku Barat Daya as a new regency of Maluku province,
Indonesia, in 2008, has opened the doors for economic development and population growth. Here, we describe qualitatively the past, present and future trends of
environmental impacts on the coastal zone of Maluku Barat Daya to formulate the best
96

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

to assess putative population structure across the region. Across all areas, no geographic
genetic structure was detected for this species, suggesting a high degree of connectivity

THE DAMSELFISH DOMINO EFFECT: A COMPETITIVE RELEASE IN A HIGHLY
PARTITIONED GUILD REVEALS SUBORDINATES VERSATILITY (Abstract ID: 29078)
Territorial damselfish play an integral role in the structure of coral reefs through their
abundant role as small-bodied consumers and aggressive holders of benthic space. Their
interactions towards inter- and intraspecific competitors influence the overall community
and how resources are partitioned. In Kimbe Bay, PNG, 7 territorial damselfish finely
partition space along the reef profile in discrete zones with semi-overlapping perimeters.
Previous research suggested that habitat preference alone was insufficient in explaining
the distributional patterns and that competition may be an additional driver. This study
quantified how subordinates ecological versatility and spatial distribution was altered
after an experimental competitive release. 22m by 10m removals of the most abundant
species, Pomacentrus adelus, were conducted to assess subordinates versatility and
recruitment. Thus, demonstrating that competition is a major driver behind fine-scale
partitioning and that species can become versatile and alter ecological parameters if
competition is decreased and additional space is available. This is ecologically important
as habitat loss may force specialists to adapt or move into previously unoccupied areas.


PHOTOACCLIMATION AND INDUCTION OF LIGHT-ENHANCED CALCIFICATION IN THE MESOPHOTIC CORAL EUPHYLLIA PARADIVISA(Abstract ID: 28808)
Depth gradient is characterized by inherent changes in light which lead to several adaptation strategies within corals and their symbionts. In this study, the strictly mesophotic
coral Euphyllia paradivisa from the Red Sea served as a model to determine the strategies of acclimation to different light conditions and to study photosynthesis and calcification coupling. The coral’s physiology was examined after one year of acclimation under
three sets of light conditions: shallow (3m); deep (50m, native population); and total
darkness. Although photosynthesis was almost similar at both light treatments under
a P vs. E curve, light enhanced-calcification was evident only in shallow acclimated
corals leading also to six fold larger linear extension rates. The dark treated specimens
were completely bleached and photoacclimation to shallow was expressed in enhanced
respiration, higher zooxanthellate densities per polyp and lower chlorophyll per cell.
We discuss the adaptation mechanisms of mesophotic corals to shallow water and to
by controlling metabolic rates and growth energy investment and therefore can survive
temporal and spatial effects of low light stress. It is generally accepted that ecological
advantages acquired by corals in their native habitat may jeopardize their survival in a
in the Red Sea shallow waters may be advantageous.

QUANTIFYING THE EFFECTS OF OCEAN ACIDIFICATION ON THE RECOVERY
OF CORAL COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 28421)
The response of corals to ocean acidification (OA) has been widely studied, with OA
predicted to reduce coral reef calcification worldwide. However, coral performance is
governed by both abiotic and biotic factors, although only a few studies have investigated
OA affects on multiple coral species. We use a spatially-explicit model of coral community dynamics to explore how OA and coral-coral competition affect coral growth
(calcification, extension, and density), and how these effects translate to communitylevel consequences on a reef recovering from disturbances. The model is parameterized
using field data and flume experiments from Moorea, French Polynesia, and projections
are used to test for different outcomes resulting from competitive dominance attributed
to species- or size- effects under ambient conditions. We then include the effect of OA
on colony growth, and evaluate its community-level impacts as the frequency of coralcoral competition increases during community recovery. Lastly, we explore the interplay
of competition and OA on coral communities with the inclusion of future disturbances,
assuming differential risk of dislodgment with changing skeletal density. While coral
interactions act synergistically with pCO2 in reducing the skeletal extension of corals
and their ability to compete for space, simulations revealed that conspecific aggregations
the difficulty in predicting community responses to OA due to the complex influence of
abiotic and biotic factors on corals.


INDIVIDUAL ANNUAL FECUNDITY AND REPRODUCTIVE ENERGY INVESTMENT IN MUSHROOM SCLERACTINIAN CORALS (Abstract ID: 28800)
Reproductive investment and growth are often used as indicators of health or stress
at the organism level. Knowledge of how such energy investment varies intrinsically
among species or morphological types is crucial for the interpretation of physiological
responses to environmental factors. Patterns of energy allocation may change in accordance to the degree of sexual maturity of the individual and are often size-dependent
processes. Insight into the allocation of energy to reproduction and growth is central to
understanding both the life-history strategies of species and the physiological tradeoffs
of individual organisms since the reproductive energy allocation strategy affects virtually
all other life-history traits. Due to their wide range of module sizes, colony growth forms,
and life-history characteristics, scleractinian corals provide an important opportunity to
assess how the relative allocation to sexual reproduction relates to morphology, size,
and life-history strategies. We examined the reproductive activity and energy investment
of two mushroom scleractinian corals, bearing different reproductive strategies; Fungia
fungites and Herpolitha limax and surveyed the size frequency distribution of the fungiid
populations in their natural habitat in the coral reefs of Okinawa, Japan. Fecundity was
were more female-biased at middle ages than in early and late life ages and the middle
size group showed high settlement rates in comparison to other size groups.


GENOTYPING-BY-SEQUENCING REVEALS LACK OF STRUCTURE IN THE DEEPSEA OCTOCORAL SWIFTIA SIMPLEX (NUTTING 1909) ON THE WESTERN
COAST OF THE UNITED STATES (Abstract ID: 28826)
Deep-sea corals provide important habitat in the deep ocean and have been recognized
as regional hotspots for biodiversity. Despite their ecological importance, little is
known about the connectivity and life history of deep-sea octocoral populations. An
understanding of the population structure of deep-sea corals is critical to ascertaining
the effects of habitat loss and genetic connections between distant populations. Next
generation sequencing, including restriction site-associated DNA (RAD) sequencing,
has allowed the discovery and application of thousands of novel single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) markers in non-model species, including marine invertebrates. In
this study we utilized high-throughput RAD-tag sequencing to develop the first molecular
resource for the deep-sea octocoral Swiftia simplex (Nutting 1909). Using this technique


97

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

HOW MORTALITY PATTERNS INFLUENCE THE COMPOSITION OF SCLERACTINIAN CORAL COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 29931)
It is commonly accepted that coral reef ecosystems possess two dynamically stable
states: one dominated by reef-building corals, and another dominated by fleshy algae.
necessarily leading to the either of the previously described states. Coral communities
may suffer mortality from storm events, bleaching, crown-of-thorns starfish outbreaks,
disease, sedimentation and anthropogenic destruction. These mortality events represent
Understanding how different types of mortality shape coral communities is necessary
to better elucidate ecological consequences of global and local stressors. Here, we
use a numerical modeling approach to describe how these stressors affect mortality
patterns and ultimately shape coral community composition. Importantly, we identify
key parameter ranges that define the structure and composition of coral assemblages. In
particular, we demonstrate that intense local stresses overwhelm the signature of global
impacts by decoupling the functional linkage between morphological characters of coral
and nuanced effects of oceanographic events. Such information allows us to explore the
possible consequences of changes in mortality patterns and allow us to anticipate its
short-term transformation in a changing world.

FISH, TRADE AND FOOD SECURITY: MOVING BEYOND THE ‘AVAILABILITY’
DISCOURSE IN MARINE CONSERVATION (Abstract ID: 27978)
The goal of food security increasingly serves as an objective and justification for marine
conservation in the global south. In the marine conservation literature this potential link
is seldom based upon detailed analysis of the socio-economic pathways between fish
and food security, is often based on limited assumptions about increasing the availability
of fish stocks, and downplays the role of trade. Yet, the relationship between fish and
food security is multi-faceted and complex, with various local contextual factors that
mediate between fish and food security. We use data from interviews and food security
assessment methods to examine the relationship between fish and food security among
fishing households in San Vicente, Palawan province, Philippines. We highlight the
local role of income and trade, emphasising the sale of fish to purchase food not easily
accessible for fishers, particularly staples. In particular, we show that because rice is
the primary staple of food security for these households, fish must be traded with the
intent of buying rice. Trade is therefore central to household food security. We argue that
the relationship between fish and food security must be considered in greater depth if
marine conservation is to engage with food security as an objective.


CO2 SEEPS IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA AS A NATURAL LABORATORY TO INVESTIGATE THE EFFECTS OF OCEAN ACIDIFICATION ON CORAL RECRUITMENT
(Abstract ID: 28827)

GLOBAL RESPONSE OF CORAL REEF BENTHIC CALCIUM CARBONATE DISSOLUTION TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION (Abstract ID: 27791)

Predicting the ecological consequences of rising atmospheric CO2 for marine communities remains a key knowledge gap. We have investigated coral recruitment processes
at shallow volcanic CO2seeps in Papua New Guinea, where nearly pure CO2 gas is
bubbling out of the sea floor. We studied (1) coral fecundity, spawning, larval settlement
and recruitment success of in situ acclimatized Acropora tenuis corals on acclimatized
settlement substrata, (2) recruit densities of all coral taxa along CO2gradients on artificial
settlement substrata after 5 and 13 months deployment, and (3) densities of coral juveniles at high CO2 and control sites in the field. The experiments and surveys documented
tenuis colonies showed the same level of reduction in recruitment success to non-acclimatised colonies. Our experiments in combination allowed us to identify some of the
likely underlying mechanisms that were responsible for the observed reduction in recruitment success. They also show that major ecological changes, and not just physiological
challenges, will strongly contribute to determining the resilience of shallow-water coral
reefs in a future high-CO2 world.

Ocean acidification (OA) is predicted to have a significant impact on the future of coral
reefs, mainly through the reduced formation of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). However,
the dissolution of stored CaCO3 has largely been overlooked in the OA community.
CaCO3 sediments represent the largest reservoir of carbonate minerals in coral reefs
and result from the accumulation and storage of CaCO3 material over thousands of
years. This presentation will demonstrate the in situ drivers of dissolution in coral reef
carbonate sands and how they will respond to increasing average pCO2 (ocean acidification). In situ benthic incubations at coral reefs around the world show that aragonite
saturation in the overlying water is a strong predictor of CaCO3 sediment dissolution
and most reefs show a similar response to increasing average pCO2 (OA). However,
every reef shows a different net sediment dissolution starting condition and the effect
of end of century OA conditions on net sediment dissolution is different for every reef.
The rate at which sediments are predicted to dissolve by the year 2100 has important
implications on the net accretion of coral reefs and their future survival. Quantifying the
global dissolution kinetics of CaCO3 sediments is clearly just as important as estimating
calcification rates when predicting how OA will impact coral reef ecosystems.



PHOSPHORUS AS A KEY NUTRIENT FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF THE CORALDINOFLAGELLATE SYMBIOSIS DURING THERMAL STRESS (Abstract ID: 28332)

DEVELOPMENT OF A SUBTROPICAL, VOLCANIC GEOLOGY-SPECIFIC MODEL
FOR SEDIMENT DELIVERY IN THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29609)

The current warming of the oceanic surface waters induces profound modifications
of the biogeochemical cycles and of the diversity of marine ecosystems all over the
world. In addition, massive bleaching events (symbiont/pigment loss) were observed in
nutritional autotrophic symbioses, such as the coral-dinoflagellate one, that dominates
tropical benthic ecosystems. As dinoflagellates provide the host with most of its daily
energetic needs, their release during bleaching events induces host starvation. However,
except for carbon, the nutritional impact of bleaching has poorly been investigated, especially regarding the needs in inorganic nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus. This
study assessed the capabilities of four hard (clade C1) and one soft (clade D1) tropical
coral species to acquire essential inorganic nutrients (NH4, NO3 and PO4) under normal
(25°C) and thermal-stress (30°C) conditions. Results showed differences in thermal
threshold and nutrient acquisition rates among coral holobionts. More, under thermal
stress, all species bleached and most of them lost their ability to acquire nitrogen, closely
linked to their photosynthetic capacities. However, phosphorus (P) demand largely
well as symbiont density. Broadly, this study highlights phosphorus as a key nutrient for
the maintenance and resilience of the holobiont under thermal stress-inducing bleaching.

Human induced accelerated erosion and transport of sediment to the coastal zone
threatens coral reef systems. Sediment export data at the island scale would be useful to
research efforts that distinguish between the effects of different land-based source pollutants
on volcanic islands, but is typically not available. We used the InVEST sediment model,
an open source, annual, RUSLE-based model based on the idea of the sediment delivery
ratio, with modified cover and erodibility factors, custom stream delineation, and a new
factor termed “terrain factor” to account for geologic differences. We calibrated the model
based on annual sediment loads for 12 watersheds with daily USGS data, and validated
the model with 42 additional watersheds. Using this model, we predicted sediment export
for 817 watersheds that discharge to coastal waters. We found that annual sediment export
ranged from 26 to 273 ton/km2/yr, by island, and the calculated SDR ranged between 1.1%
and 10.4%. Understanding geologic differences between islands was critical. A correlation
analysis showed watershed parameters slope, rainfall and elevation to be responsible for the
majority of variability, while the SDR was correlated more directly to soil erodibility. Results
from this model are the first state-wide estimates of sediment export. The parameterizations
and calibration from this study will be useful for land-use managers looking to understand
the spatial nature of sediment export and how land use changes might impact erosion and
sediment that eventually is deposited in coastal waters.
98

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


vicariance. A deep phylogeographic break was further found between Red Sea and the
IO population showed further division into two divergent clades with narrow latitudinal
showed strong nuclear divergences among populations suggesting highly restricted
dispersal rates, a surprising result considering its wide distribution range. Altogether, our
results confirm that the western IO is a biodiversity-rich, yet neglected region of the
Indo-West Pacific. Further phylogeographic work is warranted.

CORAL COMMUNITY STRUCTURE OF CORAL REEFS IN SOUTH CHINA SEA AND
TAIWAN: CURRENT STATUS AND CONSERVATION ACTIONS (Abstract ID: 27929)
Global coral reefs have been declined in the past several decades. It is critical to understand the current status of coral reefs and execute conservation actions. The benthic
community structures were surveyed by phototransects at 38 sites in areas of Taiping
(Spratly) island and Dongsha atoll in South China Sea as well as Hengchun peninsula,
Hsiaoliuchiu and Penghu islands in Taiwan during March 2013 to April 2014. The mean
cover of hard coral at all sites was 42.7% with that of hard coral at each site ranged from
12.3% to 74.1%. Six coral community types were characterized by dominant growth
forms and genera. They are branching Acroporadominant, foliaceous Montipora dominant, foliaceous Pavona dominant,Heliopora dominant, foliaceous Echinopora – massive
Porites dominant, and soft coral dominant communities. The major disturbances,
conservation value and protection actions in the 5 areas were compared to enhance
management effectiveness.


THE ROLE OF EARLY LIFE-HISTORY DYNAMICS IN THE RECOVERY OF A
KEYSTONE HERBIVORE, DIADEMA ANTILLARUM, FOLLOWING RECURRENT
DISEASE OUTBREAKS IN THE FLORIDA KEYS (Abstract ID: 28194)
Mass mortality due to disease of the abundant herbivorous sea urchinDiadema antillarum in the tropical western Atlantic and Caribbean in 1983–84 resulted in dramatic
changes in coral reef ecosystem structure and functioning. Many shallow reefs shifted
from a coral- to macroalgal-dominated ecosystem, due to the removal of this important
grazer. Recovery of Diadema has led to localized shifts back towards coral-dominated
reefs. However, in the Florida Keys, where a second disease outbreak in 1991 further
depressed densities, Diadema remain relatively rare. It is possible that at early life-history
stages, positive feedbacks for the algal-dominated state inhibit Diadema recovery. We test
this by characterizing fertilization and settlement dynamics of Diadema across sites with
variable habitat cover in the Middle Keys. We use a combination of field and modeling
studies to identify factors limiting Diadema recovery and to determine the impacts of
habitat type on recovery potential in the Florida Keys. Our results indicate that a severe
depression of local fertilization rates (< 5%) occurred following disease and continue
today. Despite this, we observed active settlement in summer 2015 suggestive of recolonization from distant populations. Comparisons with habitat cover indicate selective
settlement behavior, with a trend of higher settlement in algal- versus coral-dominated
regions, which could destabilize the algal-dominated state. However, post-settlement
processes, such as predation, may prevent settlers from reaching adulthood.


EFFECTS OF OIL DRILLING DISCHARGES ON NET OXYGEN AND NUTRIENT
FLUXES OF THE ARCTIC-BOREAL SPONGE GEODIA BARRETTI (Abstract ID:
29750 | Poster ID: 324)
The arctic-boreal sponge Geodia barretti Bowerbank, 1858 is widely distributed on coldwater coral reefs, playing a key role in carbon and nutrient cycling. With expanding oil
exploration in arctic-boreal regions, this study aimed to investigate the effects of barite
and bentonite, which are commonly discharged during oil drilling operations, on the
the control. The reduced net oxygen uptake was accompanied by at least 28% decrease
by a needle-type oxygen microsensor. However, net uptake or release of silicate, ammonium, nitrate and nitrite by the explants were not significantly different among the
control and treatments. The exposure period was followed by a recovery period of 33
days under control conditions. After the recovery period, parameters measured across
all treatments were not significantly different from the control levels. Overall, this study
demonstrated (1) the effects of barite, bentonite and natural sediment leading to less oxic
from the effects. Our findings provide insight into ecological consequences of oil drilling
activities in arctic-boreal regions.


MONITORING AND CONSERVATION OF REEF FISH POPULATIONS IN SOUTH
FLORIDA NATIONAL PARKS (Abstract ID: 29775)
Islands. Fisheries independent monitoring protocols have been developed to provide
spatially explicit population metrics such as abundance and size structure to evaluate
the effectiveness of fishery managed protected areas. Streamlining the reporting process
for regionally important species is in development so annual “quick look” reports can
be used by parks to assess fisheries management strategies and direct management
decisions. NPS units are generally not created to specifically conserve fish populations,
yet can function as valuable management tools to sustain healthy population metrics
and allow more fish to be available for capture in open fished areas. Reef fish population monitoring in the Dry Tortugas, Florida region with large no-take marine reserves,
show enhanced reef fish populations. While in contrast, management by traditional
length and bag limit regulations in the Biscayne National Park region show depleted and
possibly unsustainable snapper and grouper populations, with a collapse of historical
spawning aggregations. For example, mean length (35.5 cm +/- 5.2 se) and frequency
of occurrence (0.09 +/- 0.03) of BiscayneLutjanis analis were significantly below values
for the Dry Tortugas (46.3 +/- 1.8 and 0.29 +/- 0.04 respectively). These factors have a
significant effect on individual fecundity and the reproductive potential of the population.


CRYPTIC SPECIES AND PHYLOGEOGRAPHIC PATTERNS AMONG RED SEA
AND WESTERN INDIAN OCEAN GIANT CLAMS (Abstract ID: 29297)
Most of the phylogeographic work on giant clams has been conducted in the Coral
Triangle and adjacent regions. Much less attention has been paid on the four species
from the western Indian Ocean (IO), Tridacna squamosina (endemic to the Red Sea),
sampled from Farasan islands (Red Sea), Glorieuses, Juan de Nova and Tulear (Mozambique channel), Reunion Island and Rodrigues (Mascarene Islands). A total of 430 clams
were photographed, biopsied and genetically analysed using COI and 16S mitochondrial
highly divergent lineage, distributed from Juan de Nova to Reunion Island. Phylogenetic


99

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

METHODOLOGY TO SCREEN CHEMICALS FOR THEIR POTENTIAL BLEACHING EFFECTS ON CORALS: APPLICATION TO UV FILTERS (Abstract ID: 28739 |
Poster ID: 495)
Some studies have reported that certain UV filters contained in sunscreen lotions and
washed off by swimmers, could trigger coral bleaching. Suspicion has been extended
to all organic UV filters present in sunscreens products. The present study aimed at
investigating the potential effect that organic UV filters may have on different coral species. Two herbicides were used as positive reference compounds. A preliminary rapid
screening test was developed to assess the potential adverse effect of short exposure
(48h) to elevated UV filters concentrations (from 1 to 100 mg/L), on nubbins of the hard
coral species Seriatopora caliendrum and Stylophora pistillata. As a sub-lethal endpoint
predictive of coral bleaching, the photosynthetic efficiency of the photosystem II of
the symbiotic microalgae (zooxanthellae) was monitored by continuous measurements
using PAM (Pulse Amplitude Modulated) fluorimetry. Coral nubbins of Stylophora pistillata and Turbinaria reniformis were then exposed for 5 weeks at lower, but still higher
concentrations than those reported for natural sea waters, in 15-liters aquariums. Nubbins were exposed in closed-circuit aquarium with weekly seawater renewal. A specific
analytical methodology was developed, combining automated solid phase extraction
with UPLC-UV detection, to monitor the water UV filters concentrations, all along the
exposure period. Dose-responses curves generated with these organic UV filters will be
presented and compared with the one generated with mineral sunscreens.

EVALUATION OF RETICULATE EVOLUTION IN CORAL REEF FISHES USING
GENOME SEQUENCING (Abstract ID: 30115)
Coral reefs in the margins of biogeographic regions present unique conservation challenges and opportunities. Phylogeographic and biogeographic surveys of coral reef fishes
have revealed the importance of peripheral locations in generating endemic species or
lineages, and connectivity studies reveal that marginal coral reef may largely contribute
to species persistence as sources of propagules in demographic feedbacks that connect
populations over vast geographic distances. Furthermore at the edges of biogeographic
regions, closely related species may come into secondary contact and interbreed. It
has recently been well documented the presence of marine suture zones, where sister
species of different faunal affinities overlap and hybrids with intermediate coloration are
common. Although visual observations and preliminary genetic data suggest that the
hybrids are fertile and interbreed, reticulate evolution in reef fishes and its evolutionary
consequences are yet to be evaluated. To this aim, we investigated in various species
complexes of Indo-Pacific reef fishes and applied a RADSeq approach to genotype
individuals of parental individuals and hybrids from natural populations at thousands of
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) loci. Our results confirm the presence of hybrid
individuals and suggests that ancient and ongoing introgression are substantial evolutionary forces shaping the evolution of coral reef fishes.



INFERRING SEDIMENT TRANSPORT USING LARGE BENTHIC FORAMINIFERA:
COMPOSITION, TAPHONOMY AND GEOCHEMICAL PROXIES (Abstract ID: 28895
| Poster ID: 241)

QUANTIFYING ANNUAL CORAL GROWTH AND EROSION USING 3D MODELS
(Abstract ID: 29024)

Coral reef geomorphological processes are responsible for landform evolution, habitat
change and sediment dynamics. Understanding reef sediment transport allows insight
into antecedent processes and future landform responses. Large Benthic Foraminifera
(LBF) live in the algal rim and deposit tests (shells) which are transported by hydrodynamics (eg. waves, currents). Due to well-defined source areas, LBF tests may act
as a ‘tracer’ to infer sediment transport pathways. We analysed surficial (n=74) and
down-core (n=97) samples from two sand aprons at One Tree Reef, in the southern
Great Barrier Reef (Australia). LBF tests (Baculogypsina sphaerulata and Calcarina spp.)
exhibited increased abrasion (rs=0.60, p<0.001) with cross-reef lagoonward transport.
Transport trends were consistent with wave direction and refraction. Down-core and surficial sediments were spatially consistent suggesting transport conditions have prevailed
for the last 3 ka. While the effectiveness of LBF as tracers has been proved in this and
other studies, low abundance remains a limitation. We propose elemental ratios using
LBF tests as a novel proxy for determining sediment transport pathways. LBF test analysis (n=40) revealed decreased Mg/Ca and increased Sr/Ca with lagoonward transport.
Mg/Ca (R2=0.83, p<0.001) and Sr/Ca (R2=0.32, p<0.001) ratios were significantly correlated against abrasion, suggesting a link with test alteration. This novel proxy is rapid,
requires minimal materials and provides quantitative measures for LBF test alteration.

Habitat structural complexity is the 3D structure of an ecosystem that underpins biodiversity and resilience to disturbance. In coral reefs scleractinian corals are the key habitat
builders providing most structure. Corals have slow growth (a few mm – cm per year)
and their growth follows a multidimensional trajectory. The capacity to detect change in
the 3D structure of coral colonies relies on highly accurate and precise metrics capable
of capturing the three-dimensionality of an object. This study used state-of-the-art 3D
technologies to quantify annual coral growth and erosion of table corals in situ. We
used photogrammetry to reconstruct 3D models of both dead and live colonies from
underwater images in 2014 and 2015. We used the 3D models to measure change in
both volume and surface area after 12 months. Live corals grew by 20.5 ± 10.5 % (mean
± SE) of their original volume and 21.7 ± 6.6 % of their original surface area, while
dead colonies shrunk by 52.2 ± 7 % of their original volume and 47 ± 6.8 % of their
original surface area. Measurements were precise to 1% coefficient of variation. This
study highlights the utility of several off-the-shelf tools for quantification of coral colony
growth and erosion in 3D, a metric relevant to ecologist and managers. The novel methodology used greatly improves existing techniques for measuring coral colony growth
and erosion. This is the first study to quantify the change in volume and surface area of
table coral colonies through time using 3D models, and could be applied to other coral
morphologies to quantify change in 3D coral structure caused by disturbances.



ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT (Abstract ID: 29923 | Poster ID: 694)
widespread. There are a variety of basic differences, such as the IUCN Red List being
has extensive instructions and detailed, quantitative rules for applying a set of several
terms indicating different levels of danger. The ESA however has only a few vague terms
without any quantitative rules or extensive instructions, and even the basic terms have
required judicial rulings to clarify. Also, the Red List rules explicitly encourage applying
the precautionary principle, while the ESA forbids using it in making listings, but allows it
for management actions. Some of the basic differences between these two systems will
be explored in this presentation.

SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF NOMINALLY HERBIVOROUS FISHES ACROSS A
TEMPERATURE GRADIENT ON BRAZILIAN ROCKY REEFS (Abstract ID: 27962)
Herbivorous fishes are claimed to be an important functional group in tropical reef systems, however our knowledge of how the different functional groups respond to natural
temperature gradients is still weak. Such info is clearly a baseline to understading how
organisms will respond to possible warming events on the sea. We analysed patterns
of herbivorous reef fishes density and biomass in a nearby (few kms) sites influenced
(17oC) and not influenced (22oC) by upwelling currents in a subtropical rocky reef (23o
S, 42o W). Assemblages of roving herbivores were consistently different between eastern, warmer, sheltered sites and western, colder, more wave-exposed sites. At eastern
sites, detritivorous-herbivorous species dominated while omnivores had the highest
biomass and were dominant at western sites. Macroalgivores did not show any trends
related to location. These distributional patterns, at relatively small spatial scales of a few
100

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

kilometres, mirror large-scale latitudinal patterns observed for the studied species along
the entire Brazilian coast, where cold water associated species are abundant on southeastern rocky reefs (analogous to the western sites of this study), and tropical species
are dominant on north-eastern coral reefs (analogous to the eastern sites). Species-level
analyses demonstrated that depth was an important factor correlated with biomasses
of Diplodus argenteus, Sparisoma axillare and Sparisoma tuiupiranga, probably due to
resource availability and interspecific competition.

EMPOWERING CORAL REEF MANAGERS TO ENHANCE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT THROUGH CONSERVATION ACTION PLANNING (Abstract ID: 30016)
Conservation Action Planning (CAP)/Open Standards for the Practice of Conservation
(OS) is a powerful tool to guide  conservation teams to develop focused strategies and
measures of  success. A worldwide community of trained conservation practitioners
from over 60 organizations and agencies use this process to coach conservation teams
to their vision of success at both local and regional scales. The five steps of CAP/OS
provide project focus and team unity, even for diverse groups of stakeholders. In Hawaii,
as part of a 6-year NOAA Coral Reef Conservation Program-The Nature Conservancy
partnership, ten coral reef areas have benefited from convening teams of scientists, community members, conservation practitioners, fishers, landowners, government agency
staff, and other stakeholders to strategically address conservation needs. Case studies
illustrate the customized use of CAP/OS methods at these coral reef sites in Hawaii,
and how the process was specifically designed to meet their needs and address priority
threats such as land based pollution, unsustainable fishing, and climate change. A comparative analysis across the plans will illustrate the similarities and differences among the
sites for target species and habitats, viability, priority threats, strategies, measures and key
outcomes.


CHANGING LOCAL ECOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE IN THE SOLOMON ISLANDS:
APPLYING AN INDEX OF TAXONOMIC DISTINCTNESS TO FOLK TAXONOMY
(Abstract ID: 28325 | Poster ID: 592)
The Western Pacific region is rich in biological and cultural diversity. Local livelihoods
are closely linked to marine ecosystems, as reflected in a range of customs, fishing
methods, and local ecological knowledge (LEK) specific to the marine realm. A rich folk
taxonomy enables communities highly dependent on living natural resources to harvest
and manage them more efficiently, but also to detect and react to environmental change.
A loss of this LEK threatens the adaptive capacity of communities, increasing their
vulnerability to local and global environmental change. Ongoing economic and societal
changes have eroded LEK worldwide, including the Western Pacific. However, research
on folk taxonomy in connection with environmental change is mostly limited to assessing the richness of terminology. Focusing on the number of terms alone fails to account
for additional embedded information on locally-known attributes, such as behavior or
habitat. Yet, this information is vital to understand and detect ecological processes and
react to changes. Indicators accounting for this added layer of information are also more
likely to detect subtle changes in LEK than those focusing only on the type and number
of different names. We applied an index of taxonomic distinctness to folk taxonomy in
a number of Solomon Island coastal communities, examining differences in folk taxonomic knowledge between age and gender groups and at different distances to market,
and assessing whether the index of taxonomic distinctness performed better at detecting
changes than an index of taxonomic diversity.


ACCURACY AND PRECISION OF HABITAT STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY METRICS DERIVED FROM UNDERWATER PHOTOGRAMMETRY (Abstract ID: 28126)
Photogrammetry together with application of structure from motion software is emerging as a leading technique to create three-dimensional (3D) models of corals and reefs
from which biophysical properties of structural complexity can be quantified. It is
essential to assess the accuracy and precision of photogrammetric measurements to
support their application in research and monitoring. This study evaluated the precision
(by repeated modeling) and accuracy (by comparison with laser reference models) of
geometry and structural complexity metrics derived from photogrammetric 3D models
of marine benthic habitat at two ecologically relevant spatial extents; individual coral
colonies (of different morphologies) and patches of reef area of 100s of square metres.
Surface rugosity measurements were generally precise across all morphologies and
spatial extents with average differences in the geometry of replicate models of 1–6 mm
for coral colonies and 25 mm for the reef area. Precision decreased with complexity
of the coral morphology, with metrics for small massive corals being the most precise
(1% coefficient of variation (CV) in surface rugosity) and metrics for bottlebrush corals
being the least precise (10% CV in surface rugosity). The 3D geometry of coral models
differed by only 1–3 mm from laser reference models however surface rugosity values
for all morphs were underestimated by between 8% and 37%. This study provides important information on the accuracy and precision of models and metrics derived from
off-the-shelf mapping systems which should allow for their targeted use by non-experts
in computer vision within these contexts.
