
Specific pink color abnormality in genus Porites has been reported from many regions
in recent years. Pink color abnormality has various types; such as pink lines, pink spots,
pink patches, pink bands. Together, these are called pink pigmentation syndrome (PPS),
and a pink fluorescent color is seen in all types. However, there has been little research
in Okinawan Porites (combined PPuPS). In this study, we investigated the frequency of
PPuPS in Okinawa, and focused on defining a cause(s) for this syndrome. We examined
17 sites around Okinawa Island by taking images of more than 30 Porites colonies per
site. PPuPS level, presence of epibionts, and presence of macroalgae were checked
from photographs. Also, we calculated PPuPS incidence and examined relationships
of PPuPS to epibionts and algae by multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) and principal
component analysis (PCA). Most sites showed approximately 80% incidence of PPS and
approximately 50% incidence of purple pigmentation syndrome (PuPS). However, sites
at southern Okinawa (Odo, Oujima) uniquely showed a very lowly incidence of PPuPS
(PPS: 37.5-48.6%, PuPS: 9.4-13.5%). Both sites also showed a relatively low quantity of
epibionts and macroalgae, but we could not statistically determine the possible causes
of color abnormality to epibionts or macroalgae. It may be possible clarify a cause of
PPuPS by investigating these two sites in more detail.



TRANSGENERATIONAL EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE STRESS: IMPACTS ON
AND BEYOND CORAL REPRODUCTION (Abstract ID: 28172)

ENFORCEMENT IN MEETING GLOBAL CONSERVATION TARGETS (Abstract ID:
27800)

As oceans warm, corals are exposed to temperatures outside their normal range, causing
stress to the organism. Previous studies demonstrate that temperature stress negatively
impacts the reproductive output of corals. However, the transgenerational impacts of
temperature stress on corals are unknown. Additionally, corals are expected to experience warmer temperatures months before the spawning season, when their gametes
are still developing. To assess transgenerational effects of temperature stress during
gametogenesis, colonies of Montastraea cavernosa were exposed to elevated temperature
for two weeks four months prior to spawning, and then returned to the reef. At spawning,
gametes from temperature stressed and unstressed corals were combined to create four
fertilization crosses: unstressed eggs and sperm, unstressed eggs with stressed sperm,
stressed eggs with unstressed sperm, and stressed eggs and sperm. Larvae and juveniles
from each cross were kept at ambient (29°C) and elevated (31°C) temperatures. Larvae
and juveniles originating from stressed gametes had lower survival. When temperature
stress occurred during both gametogenesis and larval or juvenile development, the
decrease in larval and juvenile survival was exacerbated. These results demonstrate that
temperature stress during gametogenesis has latent effects on larval and juvenile survival.

Protected area coverage has expanded rapidly in recent decades, yet there has been
considerable debate surrounding the ability of protected areas to conserve biodiversity
through establishment alone. While protected areas set geographical boundaries, enforcement of the laws and regulations within them is a fundamental driver of user compliance and reserve success, which highlights the importance of active management.
However, non-compliance is widespread and threatens the objectives and benefits which
protected areas are intended to provide. This is particularly true in marine environments,
which have experienced an estimated 513% expansion since 1990 but have documented
continued shortfalls in management and illegal resource extraction. With international
coverage, a critical question arises: to achieve maximum conservation benefits are limited funds best spent on expanding the current MPA network or managing existing MPAs
to a higher degree? Here, we explore this question in no-take MPAs by modelling fisheries and conservation benefits in a non-spatially distributed, unconstrained system. We
then apply this model to the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park to retrospectively analyse
the 2004 re-zoning expansion and its effectiveness in protecting the commercially and
ecologically valuable species, the coral trout (Plectropomus leopardus).



HOW TIME AND SPACE INFLUENCE LIFE-HISTORY TRAITS IN CORAL COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 29230)
Scleractinian corals have persisted under environmental shifts that have occurred over tens
of thousands of years, and meanwhile evolved a vast array of life history traits. Today’s
rates of change, however, are much higher and organisms have to be able to adapt a lot
faster. In the first example we use a spatially explicit, individual-based model to explore
performance) under various environmental settings. Additionally, we estimate the required
adaptation potential for a coral community in order to survive this century under different
IPCC climate scenarios. Our findings show that (i) direct competition among corals seems
to become a subordinate trait, and (ii) under the RCP4.5 scenario (2 °C temperature increase) a a simulated coral community would only maintain 5-15 % cover if it could adapt
to Climate Change within 20-30 years, which is highly unlikely. The resulting community
would then mainly consist of temperature-tolerant and some fast-growing species. In the
current project we monitor environmental conditions of distinct habitat types at 7 stations
along Heron Island Reef continuously for two years, and respiration rates of typical benthic
communities at two stations seasonally. Based on these data we will use a variation of the
individual-based modelling approach above to analyze the importance of particular life
history traits in benthic communities at distinct locations, measure their productivity rates
and estimate their trajectories under Climate Change scenarios.

(Abstract ID: 28170)
Mirroring global trends, coral reefs in the Florida Keys have lost significant coral cover
since the 1970s. The main reef-building process, coral calcification, has undoubtedly
slowed on a region-wide scale resulting from declines in cover of massive head corals
and the large, branching Acropora spp. In examining the coral record, however, it remains
to be determined whether coral growth rates (linear extension or calcification) have
systematically changed over the past two centuries. We present spatial and temporal patterns in existing and new data on coral growth rates for four reef-building species in the
Florida Keys. We also examine the deconstruction side of the equation by quantifying
decadal-scale rates of reef erosion by completing a study started in 1998 wherein dead
coral heads were fitted with erosion-resistant cement and stainless-steel markers. In
2015, we revisited the site and found an average of 94 mm (std dev: 56) of reef elevation
loss at 28 stations during the 17.3 year period. With the estimated rate of reef erosion
at 5.4 mm per year, reefs that are presently devoid of coral cover in the Florida Keys are
rapidly being eaten away by grazers and bioeroders. Conservation efforts intended to
increase the abundance of parrotfish may, therefore, have adverse results in the Florida
Keys and in other areas where herbivores are not targeted fisheries. Managing reefs with
respect to physical resilience, in addition to ecological resilience, could optimize the
expenditure of resources in conserving reefs and the services they provide.


INCIDENCE AND CAUSE OF PINK/PURPLE PIGMENTATION SYNDROME IN

183

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


Strategy Theory (UAST), has been hypothesised to apply to all creatures on the tree of
life, including corals. The UAST reflects the means by which an organism allocates resources between acquisition, maintenance or regeneration. However, previous attempts
to classify scleractinian corals according to UAST have been inconclusive, perhaps
because the traits used in these analyses were not chosen following the principles set out
in the theory. Here, we test the ubiquity of UAST theory using a recently compiled online
database of coral traits. The application of UAST will lead to improved insight into
the variation of responses in coral assemblages. Subsequently, this will facilitate better
informed management decision-making by allowing predicting the response of dynamic
reef systems to different environmental conditions.

USING POLICY AND CORAL RESTORATION ACTION TO MITIGATE AND PREVENT INVASIONS BY AQUATIC ALIENS ON HAWAI’I’S CORAL REEFS (Abstract
ID: 28949 | Poster ID: 621)
The introduction of aquatic invasive species (AIS) threatens Hawai’i’s coral species
diversity and existence, especially through vectors of transfer such as biofouling of
ballast water and ship hulls. A single AIS can have the ability to monopolize food, space
resources, and cause the endangerment or extinction of endemic coral. The Hawaiian
Islands are the most isolated archipelago in the world as they are 2500 miles away from
the nearest continent and 1000 miles from the nearest islands. This allows for spectacular speciation that occurs nowhere else. For example, more than 20% of coral species
are endemic to Hawai’i. Not only do corals provide food and refuge for other organisms
inhabiting coral reefs, they also provide important recreational, scenic, and in turn,
economic opportunities. Presently, around 350 AIS have been found in the Hawaiian
Islands, and the majority have been unintentionally brought over through the maritime
industry. For example, 80% of consumable goods in Hawai’i are imported by ships. As a
result, the frequency at which a single species of AIS may visit the state is relatively high
thus constantly posing the threat of invasion. Though Hawai’i coral reefs are at a severe
disadvantage because of AIS introductions, hope is not lost. This presentation will focus
on the current state of affairs with regards to coral-reef-associated AIS preventative and
reactive measures including coral restoration projects and biofouling regulation development/implementation for the State of Hawai’i.

QUANTIFYING THE ACCUMULATION OF MARINE DEBRIS NEAR CORAL
REEFS USING AERIAL IMAGERY AND GIS ANALYSIS (Abstract ID: 28822 | Poster
ID: 411)
Hawaii’s coral reef ecosystem is a valuable natural resource that supports a unique and
diverse host of marine life, providing sustenance to Hawaii and its inhabitants. The Great
Tsunami of 2011 had devastating effects on Japan, dispersing millions of tons of debris,
some of which drifted great distances across the Pacific Ocean via wind and current.
This Japanese tsunami marine debris (JTMD), which includes an assortment of plastics,
buoys, vessels and large docks, continues to make its way into Hawaiian waters. Debris
poses serious risk to Hawaii’s fragile reefs, including entanglement of reef dwelling organisms, introduction of aquatic invasive species, and physical breakage, particularly from
large debris like vessels. In order to characterize the ecological consequences of JTMD,
it is important to understand and quantify where and what debris is accumulating. Given
the remoteness of coastlines in the Hawaiian Islands, large scale surveillance efforts are
needed to identify these “hotspots” of marine debris. This project collected high-resolution aerial imagery and then, using ArcGIS software, identified and characterized marine
debris densities along Hawaiian shores. This innovative technique allows analysts to identify hotspots across the state and their association with coral reefs. The project method
could also prove useful in other sites or to quantify different targets, such as sedimentation
or coastal wildlife. The study’s findings will inform resource management on the part of
federal and state government and local nonprofit and community groups.


THE GENUS WAMINOA ASSOCIATED WITH PALYTHOA HELIODISCUS (Abstract
ID: 29253 | Poster ID: 62)

SOCIO-ECOLOGICAL IMPLICATION OF HUMAN MULTI-IMPACTS ON CORAL
REEF ECOSYSTEM AND ~ PALAU AS A CASE STUDY~ (Abstract ID: 28985)

Waminoa species live on soft and stony corals, and can increase in number until they
cover the entire host, disturbing the host’s photosynthesis. Furthermore, Waminoa species feed on coral mucus and steal food from host corals. Therefore the study Waminoa
species can be considered important in understanding coral reef ecosystems. There
are two genera of symbiotic dinoflagellates within Waminoa species, Symbiodinium and
Amphidinium. Previous studies have considered that Symbiodinium is acquired from host
corals but phylogenetic analyses have revealed that the Symbiodinium ofWaminoa spp.
are different from the Symbiodinium of the host corals. Instead, the Symbiodinium and
Amphidinium of Waminoa species are acquired via vertical transmission. In this study in
Okinawa, Japan, we found a Waminoa species on the zoantharian Palythoa heliodiscus
with a white line on the dorsal side, different from described species. Additionally, to
not, the internal transcribed spacer region of ribosomal DNA (ITS-rDNA) sequences of

Coral reef ecosystem supplies a number of ecosystem services that sustain human
society. However, the ongoing rapid and multiple environmental changes caused by human activities are suspected to disturb the dynamic equilibrium and result in the loss of
present reef ecosystem. The loss of reef ecosystems will have a critical impact in island
society where socio-ecological interactions are highly linked. This study focus on the reef
ecosystem in Palau. We first conducted surveys around coral reefs on different environment parameters including nutrient, chla, POC/N, carbonate chemistry and evaluated
the correlation with the coral community structure. We found that aragonite saturation,
nutrient condition and turbidity are the 3 main factors that define coral community
structure. Then, we focus on the two stress, waste water discharge and ocean acidification (OA), and evaluate the potential ongoing impacts on Palau reef ecosystem. Results
demonstrated that both OA and excess nutrient discharge is already causing degradation
to the coral community, which may lead to the decrease of benefit such as coastal protection and tourism. These results suggest local management such as sewage treatment,
together with the consideration of climate change, will be essential for management of
Palau coral reef ecosystem.



PHYLOGENY AND DIVERSITY OF SEA PENS IN SOUTHERN JAPAN (Abstract ID:
29358 | Poster ID: 64)

ADAPTIVE STRATEGIES OF SCLERACTINIAN CORALS (Abstract ID: 29093)

Sea pens are important components of sandy and muddy marine ecosystems from shallow to deep waters around the world. However, our understanding of the phylogenetic
relationships of sea pens is very poor and classification is confused and difficult. Despite

One of the major goals of ecology is to identify the way organisms meet the challenge
of existence in different environments. One approach, termed the Universal Adaptive

184

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

ture is developed in lagoons of 25 atolls and islands widely geographically spread over
14° longitude and therefore subject to disparate environmental regimes. This species
exhibits a remarkable wide range of colors of the shell and cultured pearls. The factors
that contribute to the color determination include the oyster phenotype (genetic), the
culture zone (environment) and their interactions. To understand the origin of the
phenotypic color variations, several approaches have been approached, both at a genetic
and a macro-environmental level. Specific crosses are set up to show the clear pattern
of phenotypic inheritance of flesh and shell color mutation consistent with Mendelian
inheritance and expression of a single-locus, dominant trait. Relations to environmental
hatchery system, to test in field for their potential. For pearl color, classification tree
model could be built to predict, according to shell phenotype and culture location, the
color and darkness level of harvested pearls. Lustre was shown to be more influenced by
the environment than by phenotype. All these preliminary results have implications for a
its phenotypic plasticity.

high biodiversity in the Ryukyu Islands (southern Japan), records of sea pens are very
few. In this study, we collected sea pen specimens from the Ryukyu Islands and Sagami
Bay and analyzed the phylogenies of two mitochondorial protein coding genes, MutS
and the ND2 region. Consequently, family Virgulariidae was not a monophyetic group,
nor was Pennatulidae or Kophobelemnidae. As well,Pteroeides with acrozooids formed a
monophyly sister to a clade ofPteroeides without acrozooids and these two groups were
separated by high genetic distance. As Sclerobelemnon (Kophobelemnidae) formed a
paraphyletic group including Cavernulina (Veretillidae), this suggests thatCavernulina is
derived from Sclerobelemnon. The traditional classification scheme is not reflected in phylogenetic relationships and therefore requires revisions. Additionally, from this research,
we report the first records ofScytalium (Virgulariidae) and Echinoptilum (Echinoptilidae) in
the Ryukyu Islands. Overall, we have confirmed at least 12 species-groups in Okinawa .
It is clear more research is needed on this understudied group in Okinawa.

MANIPULATING CORAL-ALGAL SYMBIOSES TO ASSESS THE RELATIVE


Reef corals that have recovered from thermal bleaching often show increased tolerance
to thermal stress, but it is not clear how much of this increased thermotolerance is due
to changes in algal symbiont communities vs. acclimatization of the coral host. This
question can be addressed by manipulating corals to host different symbiont assemblages. Replicate cores from 4 colonies of the Caribbean coral Siderastrea siderea were
heat-bleached (by exposure to 32 C for 10 days), or herbicide-bleached (by exposure to
DCMU for 10 days) and allowed to recover under high or low light at 26 C (resulting in
recovery with symbiont assemblages that varied in their abundance of Symbiodinium
D1a). This gave replicate corals of the same genotype that either had or had not undergone thermal acclimatization (as measured by tag-based RNA seq) and either had or had
not changed their algal symbiont communities (as measured by an actin-based qPCR assay). Corals were common-gardened under ambient light conditions for 1 month before
being exposed to a second period of thermal stress (32 C for 10 days). Thermotolerance was measured as a combination of photochemical efficiency (using chlorophyll
fluorometry) and symbiont loss (using qPCR). This approach allows us to tease apart
the contribution of host acclimatization and shifts in symbiont assemblage to holobiont
thermotolerance. As reefs continue to warm over the coming decades, understanding
the relative importance of different mechanisms in changing coral thermotolerance is
critical to managing reefs to maximize coral survival trajectories.

GROUNDWATER-ASSOCIATED NUTRIENTS IMPACT BENTHIC PRODCUTIVITY
AND NUTRIENT UPTAKE ACROSS A REEF FLAT IN MAUNALUA BAY, HAWAI’I
(Abstract ID: 28765)
Submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) can contain high nutrient concentrations from
sources that include agricultural activities, urbanization, and leaky septic systems. Coral
reef systems are especially sensitive to increases in nutrient concentrations which can
change community composition, productivity, and nutrient uptake by the benthos. In this
study we used salinity as a proxy to map groundwater-derived nutrients, across a coastal
reef in Maunalua Bay, Oahu over time. Nutrient relationships were derived by sampling
synoptically along an onshore to offshore transect from the SGD seeps. Using in situ
benthic chambers, we mapped the C-uptake and dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) uptake by different species across the reef. We also mapped algal species distributions, and
quantified the contribution of different species to benthic productivity and DIN uptake
across the reef. Results indicate that DIN uptake and productivity vary among species
and vary spatially across the reef. This spatial pattern of nutrient uptake and productivity
in turn affects the concentration of important chemical constituents of the water transiting the reef system, which has implications for reef resilience and health.



HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING OF CORALS IN LABORATORY CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 28678 | Poster ID: 546)

COMPETITION AND ITS CONSEQUENCES ON CHANGING CARIBBEAN CORAL
REEFS (Abstract ID: 29817)

Spectral signatures of corals, seagrasses, macroalgae and other coral reef habitats are
needed for remote sensing as well as for physiological and ecological studies. The necessary reflectance spectra have been collected both in situ and in laboratory conditions.
Fiber optics probes were used to collect the data. However, coloration of corals may
vary significantly within a coral colony. Such variability is common also in the case of
macroalgae. Collecting spectral data from all these differently colored parts with a fiber
optics is a tedious task and the total studied area still covers just a small fraction of the
colony. We designed a scanning bench for hyperspectral imaging spectrometer HySpex
that allows to collect high resolution imagery in laboratory and outdoors (not in marine
environment). Spectral range of HySpex is 410.6-989.2 nm, spectral resolution 2.5 nm
and the imagery is collected with high spatial resolution. For example, with the 30 cm
lens the spatial resolution is around 0.1 mm. Also a 100 cm lens is available and the
altitude of the spectrometer above the study object is adjustable. We tested performance
of the system by collecting imagery of live (fluorescent and non-fluorescent species)
and dead corals in an shallow water aquarium which was placed under the imaging
spectrometer. The imagery revealed remarkable variability in coral reflectance at subcentimeter scale. This instrument can be used in multitude of coral reef studies, but the
potential range of applications is wide.

Coral cover on Caribbean coral reefs has dramatically declined over the last several
decades accompanied by an increase in “weedy” coral species, gorgonians and sponges.
Loss of coral cover and diversity can lead to decreased structural complexity, fish populations and decreased coral recruitment, ultimately reducing productivity, ecosystem
function and the recreational value of reefs. Thus, understanding the outcomes of competitive interactions between corals and other benthic species in the context of changing
community structure on Caribbean coral reefs is critical. We combined observational
field surveys and a common garden experiment to understand the frequency, outcome,
and consequences of competition between corals, sponges, encrusting gorgonians and
zoanthids. We found consistent competitive outcomes between species. Interestingly, we
observed that multiple species grew most when paired with a conspecific competitor.
Importantly, we found that several increasingly common benthic species are able to
rapidly outcompete key reef building corals. Our data provide insights regarding the
mechanisms driving observed shifts in benthic community structure on Caribbean reefs.
Further, these results provide some of the first contemporary empirical data that can be
used to develop competitive models to predict shifts in coral reef community composition and reef function.


DIRECT FINANCING OF CONSERVAITON ON THE GROUND: A MODEL FOR
PALAU AND BEYOND (Abstract ID: 29694)

SHELL AND PEARL CHROMATIC VARIATION IN PINCTADA MARGARITIFERA
AMONG CORAL REEF ENVIRONMENTS IN FRENCH POLYNESIA (Abstract ID:
27862)

Local managers and conservation leaders – the cornerstone of marine management
success – must have dependable and adequate resources, and freedom from political
interference. We report out on a public/private partnership model that directly finances
ground-level efforts by these key actors. The model incorporates simple incentives and
the checks and balances necessary to effectively implement programs. It also aligns

The black-lipped pearl oyster Pinctada margaritifera inhabits subtropical and tropical
coral reefs, and is particularly abundant in the lagoons of French Polynesia. Its aquacul-

185

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

often these designations are still used and discussed in ways that suggest they are equivalent to species. However, various lines of evidence indicate that most Clades contain numerous ecologically and physiologically distinct entities (‘types’ or ‘sub-clades’), many of
which represent reproductively isolated species. Recent efforts have begun to populate
each Clade with formally described taxa, but there remain hundreds of entities that merit
unique binomials. As the community moves forward revising Symbiodinium systematics,
the imperative question is whether the informal Clade structure effectively organizes this
species diversity in a hierarchical framework. Do Clade designations promote or rather
hinder scientific discourse and the advancement of knowledge? As emerging evidence
from comparative genomics further clarifies the phylogenetic relationships among Symbiodinium, we argue that Clades have outlived their usefulness and should be replaced
with generic designations that more accurately reflect their taxonomic rank.

user fee sources with private funds, risk capital sources, and technologies that reduce
costs and increase management efficacy. Palau has a network of marine protected areas
(MPAs) and conservation programs that rely on bottom-up implementation. Our model
caters to local managers, who must juggle a suite of challenges related to enforcement of
no-take zones and ever-changing local politics. These conservation leaders also require
financing to develop local capacity, engage community outreach, and use technology effectively. We seek to reduce their time spent navigating political landscapes and securing
adequate funding and related resources, allowing more time for key management operations. Moreover, our approach rewards effective management and leadership. Model
implementation is proceeding under a formal Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
with the Republic of Palau. The effort is aligned with overarching regional initiatives,
including the Micronesia Challenge, Protected Area Networks, and Palau’s emerging
National Marine Sanctuary.



RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE ABUNDANCE OF BUTTERFLYFISHES AND
CORAL COMMUNITIES IN THE REEF AREAS OF TUTICORIN REGION, GULF OF
MANNAR, INDIA (Abstract ID: 28744)

IMPACTS OF NEAR SHORE STRESSORS ON FERTILIZATION SUCCESS IN THE
STONY CORAL, MONTIPORA CAPITATA (Abstract ID: 28818 | Poster ID: 171)
In Hawaii, runoff and thermal stress are some of the main physical stressors on coral
reef communities. Successful reproduction and recruitment is important in promoting
reef resilience and recovery. While the impacts of sediment, salinity, and temperature
on adult corals have been extensively studied, their effects on fertilization of Hawaiian
corals remain poorly understood. In this study, we tested the hypotheses that fertilization
would be negatively affected by high sediment concentrations, low salinity, and high
temperature. In June and July 2015, we collected bundles of sperm and eggs from
the dominant Hawaiian coral, Montipora capitata, and determined fertilization success
in various treatments and found that fertilization success differed among treatments.
Fertilization success significantly decreased in both the low salinity and high temperature
treatments, however, it did not differ with high sediment loads. These results suggest that
fertilization of Montipora capitata can be successful under high sediment concentrations,
but is negatively affected under anomalously high temperature or low salinity. Kaneohe
Bay has a long environmental history of high sediment loads and further studies are
needed to ascertain if these corals are locally adapted to suspended sediment and are
better able to successfully reproduce under such harsh conditions.

Reef fishes play a vital role in any reef ecosystem and butterflyfishes are in close association with corals. Despite their ecological importance, butterflyfishes are poorly studied
and documented in Gulf of Mannar, India. Here we report the relationship between
the coral growth forms and abundance of butterflyfishes in four islands of Tuticorin
region of Gulf of Mannar namely Vaan, Koswari, Kariyachalli and Vilanguchalli islands.
Live coral cover, coral diversity, coral growth form, butterfish abundance and diversity
were assessed during 2014. Live coral cover was found to be between 17.7±1.45 and
37.24±2.54%. Visual census using belt transects was done to assess the fish communities and 5 butterflyfish species belonging to the genus Chaetodon were noticed. Among
Highest abundance of butterflyfishes was recorded in Kariyachalli Island with 117 50/
m2 where the percentage of live coral was also highest (37.24%). The abundance of
total Chaetodontidae density strongly correlated with the scleractinian coral cover and
with the cover of branching corals. The results suggest the existence of strong links
between chaetodontids and the cover of scleractinian corals. Further studies are needed
to assess the behavioural and spatial distribution of these fishes in Gulf of mannar to get
the baseline information for the better management.


AGENT BASED MODELLING AS A TOOL TO MANAGE DREDGING IMAPCT ON
CORAL SPAWNING (Abstract ID: 28614)


Turbidity and sedimentation generated by dredging and dredge material disposal can
seriously affect coral reproduction during spawning periods. Numerical modelling can be
used as a powerful tool to predict and manage the risk of impacts. Dredge plume modelling predicts the plume dispersion and associated turbidity and sedimentation rates, and
simultaneous agent based modelling is used to predict the pathways of released gametes
and connectivity between reefs on a regional scale. Combined with set tolerance limits,
the modelling can be used to predict the level of impacts from a given programme, and
scenario type modelling can be used to optimise the dredging plan to minimise impacts.
Taking this a step further, a reliable forecast model provides the opportunity to make
informed proactive and adaptive management decisions of the dredging during a spawning period to minimise the impact on the coral gametes. The presentation will show
examples of dredge plume and coral spawn modelling in Western Australia and discuss
how this can be used to proactively manage the risks of impacts. The study was carried
out using DHI MIKE Agent Based Modelling (ABM) tool. This integrates hydrodynamic,
wave, sediment transport and the ABM models to define the dredge plume dispersion
and concurrent behaviour of coral larvae in response to the environment. Examples of
management measures will be provided and discussed.

CORAL SETTLEMENT, SURVIVABILITY, AND DIVERSITY IN A HEAVILY
STRESSED SUB-OPTIMAL URBAN REEF ENVIRONMENT IN THE FIJI ISLANDS
(Abstract ID: 27793)
A relic inshore reef ecosystem located 400 meters from the Fijian capital City of Suva
and adjacent industrial area was monitored monthly from July 2014 to July 2015 for
coral cover, recruitment rates, sedimentation rates, light intensity, temperature, salinity,
and dissolved oxygen magnitudes. Five permanent quadrats, five settlement tile racks,
five sediment traps, and two light and temperature loggers were deployed in this site,
and in a control site with a similar depth profile and located offshore. Despite a major
sewage spill disaster in Suva Harbour in December 2014, the stressed inshore site
recorded higher coral species diversity and similar species abundances in comparison to
the offshore site. A significant decrease in coral cover was observed between July 2014
(27.10%) to January 2015 (20.33%) in this site, however, no significant decrease was seen
in July 2015 (18.47%). Coral spat abundance on artificial substrata (6720 cm2 per site)
was similar for both sites except for Family Poritidae; with relatively similar total yearly
spat abundance between sites: 106 spat inshore, 132 spat offshore. Annual sedimentation was significantly higher in the inshore site (657.14 grams), compared to the offshore
site (371.52 grams). Particulate Organic Matter (POM) was also significantly higher in
the inshore location (107.51 grams), and (43.37 grams) for the offshore site. Mean light
Intensity was significantly lower for the inshore site (69.81 lum/ft2) compared to the
offshore site (239.26 lum/ft2). Mean ambient site temperature was consistently similar
for the inshore and offshore sites; 26.87 and 26.86 degrees Celsius respectively.


A SYSTEMATIC REVISION OF SYMBIODINIUM: “CLADES” ARE GENERA (Abstract
ID: 29647)
Twenty-five years have passed since the first phylogenetic data revealed that members
of the dinoflagellate ‘genus’ Symbiodinium comprised highly divergent lineages.
Hundreds of published papers on cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbioses confirm genetic
variation within this microalgal group is both evolutionarily broad and highly diverse.
Traditionally, these divergent lineages have been referred to in the literature as “Clades.”
Although many researchers recognize the extent of diversity within each Clade, all too


186

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

CORAL COLONIZATION ON REEF BALLS AT RATATOTOK COASTAL ZONE IN
NORTH SULAWESI PROVINCE OF INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 27981 | Poster ID: 668)

CORAL BLEACHING IN RATATOTOK PENINSULA AND ITS SURROUNDINGS
AREA, SOUTH-EAST MINAHASA, NORTH SULAWESI PROVINCE, INDONESIA (A
15 YEARS MONITORING DATA) (Abstract ID: 28043)

Enhancing the produtivity of reef area by using artificial reef methods has been recently
used by coral reef aurthorities throughout the world. Such program is also adopted
by Indonesian reef communities. Reef Balls deployment was one of some coral reef
management activities that being used in Indonesia. Ratatotok coastal area at North
Sulawesi Province of Indonesia had been chosen for this program. During 1999 to 2001
a total of 2500 reef balls were laid at the bottom of Ratatotok coastal area. Reef Ball is
an artificial reef which was made to closely mimicked the natural hard coral substrate. It
was originate by PT Newmont Minahasa Raya to use reef balls to increase the productivity of Ratatotok coastal area. After 15 years, various hard corals were found to attach
on reef balls. More then 20 genera of hard corals colonized the reef balls. The diameter
of these corals were varied between 10 to more 40 cm. Dominant genera found to
dominate in the reef balls were Acropora spp, Porites spp, Gardineroseris sp and Favites
spp. Base on the result of this study, it seems that reef balls can be adopted as one of
promising artifial reefs chich could be used to recover a damaged reef. Keywords : hard
coral, colonization, reef ball

Ratatotok Peninsula and its surrounding areas are integrated to South-East Minahasa
District of North Sulawesi Province, Indonesia. 15 years hard coral and sea surface
temperature data were collected respectively. In 1997, 2000 and 2010 the surface
temperature was noted to rise about 2 – 3 degree of Celsius. The total coverage of hard
corals was declined or tent to decline during those years. Although several other causes,
reasons for coral destruction, bleaching events that occurred in 1997, 2000 and the latest
one was occurred in 2010 could be blame as major factor that ruined the reefs in these
area. Nevertheless, not all hard corals were affected. Compared to other Indonesian reef
which were also affected by coral bleaching, most of coral genera attacked in this study
area was the dominant genera, such as Acropora (at Ratatotok Peninsula and Hogow Island) and Galaxea (at Ratatotok Peninsula). It was very obvious that the bleaching events
in those years were corresponded by increasing sea temperature. Sea temperature data
were collected by using CTD (Conductivity, Temperature, Depth) data logger. However,
after several months, it seemed that almost all of coral suffered from bleaching were
survived. Strong current was probably the main key for the corals to survive from those
bleaching events. Keywords: coral, bleaching, temperature.



HARD CORAL CONDITIONS IN RATATOTOK PENINSULA REEF, SOUTH-EAST
STUDY: 1996-2012) (Abstract ID: 28049)
Since 1996-2012, an intensive monitoring esthablish by PT Newmont Minahasa Raya
(PTNMR) to closely monitor the condition of coral reef in the coastal areas of Ratatotok
and Buyat bay, South-East Minahasa region, North Sulawesi, Indonesia. In this area,
PTNMR a gold mining company was operated in 1996 – 2004 and put its tailing in the
seabed of Buyat Bay. One of coral reef monitoring programs is to monitor of hard coral
condition. The objective of this study was to describe the hard coral condition before,
during, and after PTNMR operation. A Line Intercept Transect (LIT) method was applied for gathering the hard coral data. Fix permanent transects were established in four
location at the depth of 3 m and 10 m. All data were collected each year. There were
several changes occurred during the monitoring period both on the number of genera
of hard coral and the total coverage of hard coral on each study sites. The percentages
of hard coral coverage were varied during the whole monitoring years. There are several
factor were identified during this study that could be connected to the fluctuation of
hard coral conditions. Fish bombing, bleaching (1997, 2010), Crown of Thorn Starfish
attacked (1998), bottom gillnetting, and coral disease were major factors that caused the
changes in hard coral. However, it can be concluded that beside such destructive factors
mentioned above, the hard coral conditions were stable during the whole monitoring
years. Moreover, there were no sign that the sediment from the PTNMR operation have
influenced the coral condition these areas. Keywords: coral reef, hard coral, ratatotok

EFFECT OF MANGROVE FOREST DISTANCE AND FISHING ON THE ASSEMBLAGE OF TARGETED NURSERY REEF FISHES (Abstract ID: 29287)
Expansion in fishing effort and reduction of adjacent habitats, such as mangrove forests,
seriously affects fishery catch in the Philippines. As a consequence, catch and abundance
of fishes are reduced significantly. This alarming situation prompts initiatives to explore
new insights for fisheries management. Small scale fishing gears in the Philippines
juvenile fish growing at mangroves to adult size subsequently move to seaward deeper
reef habitats. This study examines the effect of fishing and nursery habitat distance on
the assemblage of targeted nursery reef fishes in selected Philippine reefs with varying
distances from mangrove forests and subjected to various levels of fishing pressure. Both
fishery dependent and fishery independent methods were utilized for this study such
as survey interview with fishers and fish visual census, respectively. Initial results of the
study stress the importance of gear regulation as a simple yet sound basis for sustainable
fisheries together with other synergistic management strategy such as protection of
the reef-mangrove continuum and considering the presence and proximity of nursery
habitats, such as mangrove forests, in designing Marine Protected Areas (MPAs).


CORAL TRANSPLANTATION ON REEF BALLS AT PUTUS-PUTUS ISLAND COASTAL ZONE, NORTH SULAWESI, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 29249 | Poster ID: 663)
In 2000 around twenty reef balls were laid at the depth of 8 – 10 m in Putus-pitus Island
coastal area. Several little holes were made at each reef ball. Hard coral transplants were
attached to these holes. Acropora and Pocilloporids were chosen as transplant considering to their faster growing capabilities compared to other hard corals. Transplants were
taken at almost same depths where the reef balls were. The transplant lengths were
varied from 5 to 8 cm. At the first ten years 75 % of transplants seemed to grow well.
After 11 years the transplants started to die for unknown reason. The Pocilloporids were
no more after 12 years. Some table-like Acropora were also started to die and covered
by turf algae. After 15 years only three Acropora transplants left. However, these three
transplant were succesfully grew. Each of them attained more than 2 m in colony length.
All of these Acropora had irregular branch type of growth. As a conclusion, it can be
said that Acropora with irregular branch type would adapt perfectly to the reef ball
construction. Keywords : reef ball, transpant, Acropora


STATE-SPACE MODELLING TO QUANTIFY THE DRIVERS OF CORAL COMMUNITY DYNAMICS OF THE INSHORE GREAT BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 28436)
Knowing how different environmental and biological drivers interact to affect coral
population abundance trends is critical to understanding the resilience of reefs exposed
to multiple pressures. Here, we use a multivariate autoregressive state-space (MARSS)
modelling approach based on a density-dependent Gompertz population to model the
spatio-temporal trends in coral dynamics for 32 sites sampled over 9 years and spanning
ca. 800 km of latitude within the inshore Great Barrier Reef (GBR). The MARSS approach accounts for observational error and environmental stochasticity (process error),
while also handling missing values, irregular spaced and autocorrelated data and the
high spatial and temporal variation typically encountered in coral community time-series.


187

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

A range of MARSS models were fitted, and water clarity and storm history emerged as
key drivers of the expected underlying coral cover. The best-fit model also suggested
that the dynamics of the 32 reefs was best explained using a spatial population structure
of 4 distinct Natural Resource Management regions (NRMs). The underlying NRMspecific coral cover trends revealed 3 distinct spatio-temporal patterns over the 9 year
period: high and stable in Mackay, low and stable in Burdekin; and decrease in both the
Wet Tropics and Fitzroy regions. The MARSS approach helped to identify the key environmental drivers of coral reef dynamics of the ecologically distinct regions: information
crucial for the prioritisation of cost-effective management actions for reefs exposed to
regional-specific anthropogenic pressures.

CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT FOR PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT IN THE
PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 27790)
The Pacific Islands Managed and Protected Area Community (PIMPAC) was established
in 2005 as a long term capacity development program and social network of site based
managers, non-governmental organizations, local communities, federal, state, and territorial agencies, and other stakeholders working together to collectively enhance the effective area-based management in the US Pacific Flag Islands and Freely Associated States
of Micronesia. To do this PIMPAC supports capacity building for ecosystem-based
management approaches, which integrate land and sea connections as well as human
dimensions into management planning and activities. Examples of this scope include
ridge to reef management, marine and/or terrestrial protected areas, and community
based locally managed areas. PIMPAC’s three main goals include: 1) develop model sites
that are effectively planned, monitored, evaluated, and managed adaptively, 2) develop
jurisdictional teams with core competencies to carry out effective management, and 3)
institutionalize trainings in the region to support long term access to skills building for
current and future area based managers. PIMPAC uses four types of activities to reach
its goals: 1) Training and Technical Support, 2) Learning Exchanges, 3) Partnership
Building, and 4) Communications/ Information Sharing. When implementing these
activities, PIMPAC focuses on: adaptive management planning, biological monitoring
and socio-economic monitoring enforcement, climate change adaptation and watershed
management.



USING COASTAL ECOSYSTEM SERVICES TO MITIGATE HUMAN AND CORAL
REEF PATHOGENS (Abstract ID: 28411)
Diseases that impact both human and coral reef health represent critical management
challenges in rapidly developing coastal environments. To date, natural filtration services
provided by seagrass, mangrove and bivalve ecosystems have not been examined as
practical management tools for moderating runoff containing pathogens or diseasecausing pollutants. Using next-generation sequencing, we present a series of recent
studies suggesting seagrass meadows in a densely populated archipelago of Indonesia
regulate seawater microbial communities and significantly reduce microbial pathogens
implicated in disease causation in humans and numerous coral reef organisms. Parallel
field surveys reveal that globally devastating diseases affecting reef-building corals are
significantly lower on reefs adjacent to seagrass meadows compared to reefs without
seagrass meadows. These results underscore conceivable strategies for mitigating waterborne marine diseases and highlight novel services provided to humans and coral reefs
by intact coastal ecosystems.

MACRO AND MICRO-SCALE SPATIAL VARIATION IN THE ACOUSTIC ACTIVITY
OF SNAPPING SHRIMP ON CORAL REEFS IN THE PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 29218)
Coral reef soundscapes are increasingly becoming recognized as critical factors in the
study of reef dynamics, from the role they play in larval recruitment to the assessment
of coral reef biodiversity and ecosystem stability. Snapping shrimp produce the predominant source of sound on most coral reefs at frequencies between 2 and 20 kHz. Their
activity is influenced by a variety of abiotic factors, including light levels, temperature,
and weather. As such, coral reef soundscapes are prone to considerable flux and variation. However, this variation is still poorly understood on a variety of spatial and temporal scales, making it difficult to draw meaningful comparisons between the soundscapes
of different reefs. We report on an effort to quantify the acoustic activity of snapping
shrimp across twelve coral reef sites in the Pacific Ocean separated by distances ranging
from hundreds of meters to thousands of kilometers, including reefs across the Hawaiian
archipelago, the Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa. We use data obtained
from long-term, bottom-moored acoustic recorders to document the variability in snapping shrimp activity observed on multiple temporal scales, ranging from days to seasons,
and examine factors correlated with this variability at each location.


DAMSELS IN DISTRESS: WIDESPREAD DISEASE IN GALAPAGOS REEF FISHES
(Abstract ID: 29968)


Emergent disease is one of the less understood but potentially devastating impacts
of climate change. Warmer waters have been associated with increased disease and
population decline in benthic invertebrates, but less is known of the effects on fish
communities. We observed an outbreak of fish disease during the onset of the 20152016 El Niño event in the Galapagos Islands, Ecuador. The disease presents initially as
discoloration of the skin followed by progressive whitening, loss of scales, and epithelial
deterioration. Advanced cases have severe loss of structural integrity and limb function.
Infected individuals show abnormal behavior including distressed swimming, lethargy,
increased opercular ventilation rates, and aggressive solicitation of cleaner fish. Pathogen
isolation is in progress. To date, 16 infected species have been recorded to a depth of
15m on several islands. Prevalence rates vary, but the four most heavily infected species
at Cuatro Hermanos Island are the ring-tailed damselfish Stegastes beebei (49.1%), the
giant damselfish Microspathodon dorsalis (28.6%), the Panamic soldierfish Myripristis
leiognathos (26.0%), and the king angelfish Holacanthus passer (19.6%). Prevalence rates
are probably under-estimated as fish with advanced disease likely fall prey quickly to
predators. The wide geographic extent (>73 km), high prevalence rates, range of species
from vastly different phylogenetic backgrounds affected, and progressive symptoms of
the disease present an alarming situation for this diverse and productive fish assemblage
with high rates of endemism.

INTEGRATING ECHO-SOUNDER AND UNDERWATER VIDEO DATA FOR DEMERSAL FISH ASSESSMENT (Abstract ID: 29303)
Effective management of demersal fish species requires accurate, spatially explicit
assessments of their abundance and distribution. Non-invasive techniques such as echosounders and visual census are of particular importance in no-take marine reserves
where direct sampling is restricted. This study is investigating the use of echo-sounders
and stereo Baited Remote Underwater Videos (stereo-BRUVS) in demersal fish assessment. Echo-sounders have the advantage of covering nearly the entire watercolumn and
being able to cover vast areas in a relatively short period. However, “ground-truth” data
is usually needed to produce species-specific identification and sampling the area close
to the seafloor is problematic, requiring investigation, particularly for demersal species
in complex topography. Whereas, underwater video techniques allow identification to
species level in most cases, but in a particular location. The combination of co-located
bathymetric and habitat maps, with quantifiable acoustic backscatter and species-specific visually groundtruthed abundance, holds potential to significantly further these studies
and provide a more cost- and labour-efficient sampling regime. This study provides a
preliminary investigation into the relationship between active acoustic and stereo-BRUV
derived biomass maps acquired in Western Australia’s shallow water reefs and compares
the results across various depth strata, bathymetry and habitat.


188

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


CORAL RECRUITS ON PALMYRA ATOLL EXHIBITING ‘STRANGER DANGER’
(Abstract ID: 28745)
Corals are sessile animals that form some of the most biodiverse regions in the world.
Since these animals are usually found growing on a piece of hard substrate, they search
for cues before settlement as planktonic larvae. These animals have been known to
show density dependent recruitment, and one species Montastrea faveolata shows a
Janzen-Connell effect where young individuals do not mix with adults to escape bacterial and other conspecific related diseases. This information thus spurs the question do
coral recruits show density and distance dependent recruitment towards other recruits?
In order to answer this question photomosaic analyzing techniques were used to find
average distances between all known coral recruit genera at three sites on Palmyra
Atoll. It was found that each genera has their own specific bias, showing clustering when
compared to certain species but over-dispersion towards others. These findings are also
heavily skewed by population size since the genera compared were found at vastly different densities. In the future including studies of adult distances to juveniles conspecifically
would potentially provide information on possible Janzen-Connell effects.

FLESHY MACROALGAE SHARE DOMINANCE WITH OTHER ORGANISMS ON
DEGRADED CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 29985 | Poster ID: 583)
Based on an analysis of 482 Caribbean area sites surveyed by AGRRA in 2011-2013,
fleshy macroalgae (FMA) cover exceeded that of all other benthic organisms. Yet FMA
dominance (defined as occupying 25% or more of the substratum) was only observed
in 60% of the sites. When the cover of calcareous macroalgae is added to FMA, macroalgal (MA) dominance increased to 77% of the sites. Turf algal sediment (TAS) mats,
which displace corals and prevent recruitment of coral larvae, were present in 77% of
the sites, but only displayed dominance at 10% of sites, mainly at shallower depths (6
vs.12 m) and on patch reefs. Live coral cover only averaged 13% across all sites. The
average cover for crustose corallines and sparse turf algae, both ideal coral recruitment
surfaces, averaged 20%. Invertebrates that overgrow corals (certain sponges, octocorals,
zoanthids, tunicates) were present in most (81%) surveys. Our results support the observation that, organisms promoting reef construction are losing the competition for substratum space on most of these Atlantic reefs. Large-sized herbivorous fishes offer one
of the only natural ways to remove MA holdfasts but will avoid TAS mats. While bans
on harvesting parrotfish are a sensible component of biologically-based management,
recovery or restoration of sea urchins may be more important. In heavily fished reefs,
physical removal of MA, and/or reduced nutrient and sediment inputs to nearshore
reefs might also be needed to discourage the growth of undesirable benthic algae.


A TALE OF TWO OCEANS: ARE DEEP-SEA BAMBOO CORALS FUSSY ABOUT
THEIR NEIGHBORS? (Abstract ID: 27823)
Bamboo corals (Family Isididae) are a widely distributed group of gorgonian octocorals,
with the subfamily Keratoisidinae commonly found in the deep sea below 200 m. Highdefinition in situ images, video footage, literature, and collected specimens were used
to characterize the benthic megafauna communities on seamounts off Tasmania in the
South Pacific and on the New England and Corner Rise Seamount chains in the Northwest Atlantic. The overall benthic community structure is strikingly different between the
two locations. However, a detailed taxonomic analysis of the bamboo corals collected
suggests that a few of the species present on Tasmanian seamounts are very closely
related to, and perhaps the same species, as specimens collected from the Northwest
Atlantic seamounts. These results support the individualist theory of ecology and imply
that the environmental conditions in these two regions, although in two different oceans
and on opposite sides of the globe, are favorable for the settlement and growth of these
particular species of bamboo corals, independent of their surrounding neighbors.


EVIDENCE OF THREE LEVEL TROPHIC CASCADES WITHIN REEF FISH ASSEMBLAGES FROM BODY-SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS (Abstract ID: 29367)
Assemblage body-size distributions can provide information on the ecological
processes that structure ecosystems. Fishing can restructure marine ecosystems by
directly removing large individuals, thereby indirectly reducing predation pressure
on medium bodied individuals (prey of larger bodied species) and increasing their
density. We compared assemblage body-size distributions sampled using baited
underwater stereo-video inside and outside areas closed to line fishing at the Houtman Abrolhos Islands off Western Australia over three years. Both spline based
Functional Data Analysis and multivariate analysis of size bins found significantly
lower proportions of large and small body-size species and a greater abundance of
medium body-size species at fished sites relative to those closed to fishing. Within this
study, metrics based on body-size appear to be much more sensitive to the effects of
fishing than metrics based on abundance or biomass of particular species. Obtaining
reliable body-size information is an important consideration in studies investigating
the effects of fishing on reef fish assemblages.


MODELLING CORAL PHOTO-PHYSIOLOGY AND GROWTH POTENTIAL UNDER VARYING TURBIDITY REGIMES (Abstract ID: 28292)
Management of dredging typically relies on suspended sediment thresholds. When sediment thresholds are exceeded, the risk of damage to corals is elevated and dredging activities are suspended. Yet, most threshold values are based on limited biological data, are not
site specific, and are typically linked to coral mortality not stress. To provide more effective
management of reefs vulnerable to high sediment loads, a numeric model was developed
based on site-specific biological (photosynthetic yield, P-I curves) and physical data (light
attenuation, turbidity). The model quantifies zooxanthellae and coral growth potential (mass
carbon) under varying light-turbidity regimes, and incorporates coral acclimation to low light
over time following increases in zooxanthellae biomass. A high growth potential indicates
model (2D FM model with ECO Lab; MIKE, DHI 2012) was run for two weeks under four
light-turbidity regimes (< 5, <20, <45, >100 mg/l) for Platygrya sinesis, a common clear
and turbid water coral. The model output indicates that at <20 mg/l, both zooxanthellae
(100-150%) and coral (18-50%) growth potential is high. However at >45 mg/l low light
availability results in a negative scope for growth with no photo-acclimation occurring at the
highest turbidities. Our study provides a critical step towards a comprehensive model that,
together with site specific data, can be used as a quantitative tool to both track and forecast
the potential effects of high sediment loads on corals.


GUAM’S STAGHORN ACROPORA POPULATIONS REQUIRE MANAGING FOR
RESILIENCE (Abstract ID: 29488 | Poster ID: 169)
Guam’s coral reefs were severely impacted from back-to-back bleaching episodes in 2013
and 2014. Surveys in 2015 estimated that 47% (+/- 10%) of Guam’s staghorn Acropora
were lost to bleaching-related mortality within 12 months. This constitutes the loss of over
≥75% of their cover; others have been reduced to small, scattered clumps. Efforts to
manage for future resilience have begun. The reproductive biology of this group has not
previously been studied in Guam and this is the current focus of these efforts. Preliminary
to examine connectivity between remaining staghorn populations. Additional current
management efforts include culturing of asexual fragments from surviving communities
and reintroducing them to decimated areas. Understanding the reproductive biology,
genetic structure of remaining populations, and the relative roles of both asexually- and
sexually-produced colonies in natural populations are all critical to effectively managing
and re-establishing Guam’s staghorns.


CARIBBEAN OCTOCORAL COMMUNITY DYNAMICS: REGIME CHANGE, STABLE
STATES OR JUST THE LAST COLONY LEFT STANDING? (Abstract ID: 29089)
Descriptions of the transition of tropical reefs from dominantly scleractinian cover to
other taxa have overwhelmingly focused on the well documented loss of scleractinians
in favor of macroalgae. However, reports from both Caribbean and Indo-Pacific reefs
have documented cases of increased abundances of taxa such as sponges, zoanthids,
corallimorpharians, or octocorals. In most cases, the basis for these transitions is
unknown, but it is clear that the trajectories of other macro-invertebrate populations,
when known, are different from those of both scleractinians and macroalgae. Focusing


189

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

on Caribbean octocorals we explore 3 classes of hypotheses for why some non-scleractinian taxa have increased in abundance. 1, Scleractinians and octocorals compete
for space and the competitive balance has changed; 2, Octocorals are more resistant
to environmental challenges than scleractinians; or 3, Octocoral populations are more resilient than scleractinians, which can be subdivided to 3a, octocoral populations recover
more rapidly and preempt scleractinian recovery, and 3b, octocorals are less affected
by, and benefit from, feedbacks between community change and recruitment that have
limited the resilience of scleractinians. Data to rigorously test these hypotheses are not
available but decadal scale data from two Caribbean locations suggest that the resilience
of octocoral populations may be a key component of observed changes in abundance.

GROUPER CATCH TRENDS (1950S TO 2014) IN FIVE MARINE KEY BIODIVERSITY AREAS INFERRED FROM FISHERS’ KNOWLEDGE USING LINEAR MIXED
METHODS (Abstract ID: 28046 | Poster ID: 10)
We analyzed fishers’ knowledge data(n=1245) on ten groupers species from 1950s to
2014 in 5 marine key biodiversity areas(mKBA) in the Philippines, including Lanuza Bay,
Danajon Bank, Verde Island Passage, Polillo Islands and Honda Bay using Generalized
Linear Mixed Modelling to determine the catch per unit effort(CPUE) declines of each
grouper species throughout the decades. Fixed effects included effort variables such
age, gear, horsepower and hours fishing, while random effects included the interviewee,
and age at maturity were also modeled to determine which were better predictors of
polyphekadion, among others exhibited 34-74% CPUE decline accompanied by a
the highest CPUE decline. Life history analysis showed that groupers with lower growth
coefficient appear to be preferred by fishers. This provides evidence on catch declines
throughout the decades and its possible drivers of depletion which may be useful in
reassessing local and national policies on small scale grouper fisheries, which includes
updating the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2028. Marine protected area networks should also be strengthened to encompass the ontogenetic habitats
of species,specifically groupers.


THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BEHAVIOURAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL TOLERANCE TO ELEVATED CO2 IN CORAL REEF FISH (Abstract ID: 29351)
Reef fish exhibit individual variation in both behavioural and physiological sensitivity to elevated CO2. Those individuals that are most tolerant provide hope for future
populations to adapt to changing environmental conditions. Yet whether there is an
interaction between behavioural and physiological tolerance is unknown. We seek to
understand this relationship, as well as how elevated temperature might alter it. Juvenile
Acanthachromis polyacanthus will be reared in one of four temperature x CO2 treatments: control, elevated temperature, elevated CO2, or elevated temperature and CO2.
After 40 days individuals from each treatment will be tested for their behavioural and
physiological tolerance to elevated CO2. Behavioural tolerance will be measured as
response to chemical alarm cue in a two-choice flume tunnel. Physiological tolerance
will be measured as aerobic scope in a respirometer. We predict that a tradeoff will
exist between behavioural and physiological tolerance to CO2, where individuals with a
high behavioural tolerance will have a low physiological tolerance, and vice versa. This
indicates that at the population level, selection towards highly tolerant individuals will act
orthogonally to the direction of the most genetic variation, and so future adaptation to
high CO2 conditions will be constrained. Furthermore, we predict that elevated temperature and CO2 together will have a multiplicative effect on physiological tolerance. This
will increase the importance of behavioural tolerance, and thus push future populations
towards an increased behavioural tolerance.


RESPONDING TO WIDESPREAD REEF FINFISH EXTIRPATIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES INFERRED FROM ORAL HISTORY AND FISHERS’ KNOWLEDGE USING
LINEAR MIXED MODELS (Abstract ID: 27938)
While the Philippines is known to have the globally greatest number of shorefish species with very high fishing pressure, yet no long-term reef fisheries data are available
to explore species-level changes that may have occurred widely. Through oral history
with 2655 face-to-face interviews, we studied fishers’ recall of past catch rates of reefassociated finfish species from Lanuza Bay, Danajon Bank, Verde Island Passage, Polillo
Islands and Honda Bay. We modeled temporal trends in catch per unit effort (CPUE)
based on fishers’ reports of typical good days’ catches. Sixty-five different finfishes were
reported by fishers to have disappeared from catches between the 1950s and 2014.
The five species common to all sites with the greatest number of fishers targeting or
opportunistically catching them and reporting zero catches, and with greatest species
intrinsic vulnerability index values, were Bolbometopon muricatum, Cheilinus undulatus,
Alectis ciliaris, Epinephelus lanceolatus and Lutjanus argentimaculatus. Our models show
that between the 1950s and 2014, the perceived CPUE of bumphead parrotfish declined
by 88%, that of humphead wrasse by 82%, African pompano by 66%, giant grouper by
74% and mangrove red snapper by 64%. Using fishers’ knowledge and oral history in
this data-poor setting, we identify reef fish species vulnerable to local extinction. Among
the country’s responses to prevent such species loss includes updating the National
Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2028 and strengthening of marine protected
area networks in marine key biodiversity areas.


FINDING A BIOLOGICAL UPPER LIMIT FOR THE MESOPHOTIC ZONE (Abstract
ID: 28599)
The lower boundary of the mesophotic zone on coral reefs is largely accepted as
coinciding with the last photosynthetic hard corals. The upper limit is set at 30m. These
two boundaries are fundamentally different in character. The lower bound is capable of
moving, accommodating changes between sites in water clarity and local species capabilities. Such a mobile boundary allows the logical comparison of mesophotic reefs from
different sites based on their biology. The upper bound, as currently defined, is a more
limiting concept. Generally there is greater environmental variability in the shallows than
at depth. This variability could cause the upper limit to vary from site to site. A fixed upper
limit may lead to illogical comparisons between sites across reef zones. Here it is argued
that we should try to reach a consensus on an upper limit of the mesophotic zone, rooted
in biology, allowing the easy identification of mesophotic reefs by researchers. Potential
defining characters may include irradiance levels, changes in physiology or taxonomic
indicators. Here we propose using benthic community composition. Coral presence or
absence as a signal integrates many environmental variables which may reveal the boundaries of mesophotic reefs. Identifying corals visually may also be faster and require less
specialist equipment than other approaches. Data from Honduras is used to show vertical
reef structure if we take a lead from community data. An in progress follow up project
employing a systematic review to capture the global picture will also be explained.


THE ROLE OF NUSA PENIDA MPA IN MANTA RAYS CONSERVATION AND
TOURISM WITHIN THE LESSER SUNDA ECOREGION (Abstract ID: 27781)


Nusa Penida Marine Protected Area (20,057.2 ha) is located in southeastern Bali Island
of Indonesia. It is one of the most dense marine resource users in the southwest corner
of the ‘Coral Triangle’ by welcoming 200,000 visitors annually. Nusa Penida waters
encompass critical habitats for unique marine species such as manta rays and sunfishes.
according to IUCN Red List, and recently have been protected under Indonesian government law since 2014. The economic value created through visitors in Nusa Penida spend
their money nearly USD 2 million annually. However, manta tourism has to become
more sustainable in terms of manta life span and their habitats, as well as economic

190

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

value to the people. Based on the photo identification, 512 individuals of manta rays
have been counted within the Nusa Penida MPA since 2012. Some of them even have
been sighted 450 km away, in Komodo National Park. Major threats that need to be
addressed include illegal fishing and bycatch, marine debris and massive tourism on
manta sighting. This means connecting MPAs in order to protect their migration habitats
plays an important role in manta conservation, and a MPA network based on marine
connectivity studies is needed. Therefore, it is necessary to link Nusa Penida MPA and
some MPAs along the south coast of the Lesser Sunda Islands as one cluster of MPAs
network. This paper attempts to describe manta ray issues and the role of Nusa Penida
MPA to support manta ray protection within the Lesser Sunda Ecoregion.


ECOSYSTEM VULNERABILITY AND CUMULATIVE IMPACTS ON HAWAIIAN
REEFS (Abstract ID: 29168 | Poster ID: 596)
The nearshore reef environment in Hawai’i is impacted by a wide range of human
activities. As a result of these anthropogenic drivers, economic and sociocultural
benefits to communities in Hawai’i have diminished over time. Understanding the spatial
distribution, intensity, overlap, and cumulative impact of human activities is essential for
effective marine management and protection of ecosystem services generated by coral
reefs. Currently, this kind of information is not readily available to resource managers
and policy makers in Hawai’i. This research uses existing data and novel approaches to
produce maps for some of the most important anthropogenic drivers of coral reefs in
Hawai’i. To accomplish this, we compiled a comprehensive database, synthesized a suite
of spatial datasets into a unified framework, and devised geospatial methodologies to
produce statewide maps of anthropogenic drivers including: fishing pressure, land-based
pollution, habitat modification, and invasive species. Expert knowledge surveys were
conducted to assess the vulnerability of different habitat types to anthropogenic drivers.
The resulting vulnerability weighting factors for stressor-habitat pairs were used to produce continuous maps of cumulative impacts across the Main Hawaiian Islands. These
maps directly benefit management by identifying what places and habitat types are most
impacted, which drivers should be of greatest concern in different areas, and where
monitoring) should be prioritized.


The pearl culture is one of the most lucrative aquacultures worldwide. In South Pacific
area, it depends on the exploitation of the pearl oyster Pinctada margaritifera and relies
on the environmental conditions of lagoons. It is fundamental to assess climatic stressors, such as ocean acidification and the warming on the functionality of the resource.
The impact of pCO2 (3540, 1338 and 541µatm) was evaluated twice on pearl oysters
exposed for 100 days on shells by optical and electronic microscopy, and at molecular
level by measuring the expression of mantle genes involved in the formation of calcite
and aragonite. The impact of temperature (22, 26, 30 and 34°C) was studied on the
metabolic capabilities biomineralization on pearl oysters exposed 10 days. High pCO2
(3540 µatm) significantly slowed down the shell deposit rate at the ventral side andthe
expression level of Pmarg-PUSP6 gene. SEM observations found chemical dissolution
signs. Thirty degree Celsius was the temperature where energy metabolism and, hence,
examined through the expression measurement of mantle genes showed significant
changes of Pmarg-NacreinA1, Pmarg-MRNP34, Pmarg-Prismalin14 and Pmarg-Aspein.
These changes showed that expression of these genes was maximum at 26°C and
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projections, highlighted that pearl
oyster stocks and cultures would be severely threatened in the next decades.


CELL PROLIFERATION AND TURNOVER IN EARLY LIFE STAGES OF A SYMBIOTIC SCLERACTINIAN CORAL (Abstract ID: 28687)
Cellular dynamics underlying scleractinian coral metamorphosis and growth of the
primary polyp remain largely unknown, limiting our understanding of this critical phase
in the life cycle. In this study, we investigated coral and endosymbiont cell proliferation
while simultaneously recording TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells in four life stages (planula, early metamorphosis, primary polyp and adult colony) of Stylophora pistillata (Esper,
1797). The fate of BrdU-labeled cells was monitored in the developing primary polyp
over a 3 d period. The highest proliferation activity was localized in the pharynx area.
During the chase period, BrdU-labeled cells accumulated in the surface pseudostratified
epithelium and the skeletogenic calicoderm of the primary polyp. Surprisingly, the lowest
cell turnover was always recorded in the calicoderm, despite active, ongoing skeletal
deposition following settlement. Furthermore despite a constant symbiont to host cell
ratio, the dinoflagellates had much higher DNA synthesis rates compared to the coral
gastroderm cells, especially during planula and early metamorphosis stages. Apoptosis in
the symbiont population shifted from low rates in the larval stages to high rates in the developing primary polyp. These results highlight an ontogenic succession of post-mitotic
control mechanisms by the host of its endosymbiotic Symbiodinium sp. population.


QUALITY OVER QUANTITY: HABITAT CONDITION IS A STRONGER DRIVER OF
FISH BIOMASS ON CORAL REEFS THAN HABITAT SPATIAL EXTENT AND CONNECTEDNESS IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 28973)
There is increasing research emphasis on optimising the placement of no-take marine
reserves (NTMRs) to maximise their conservation and fisheries benefits. Recently, spatial
analysis tools have been used to demonstrate that spatial characteristics such as the
extent, proximity, and connectedness of key reef and non-reef habitats can be important
drivers of reef fish abundance. In this study, we used a combination of in situ assessment
of benthic habitat condition and remote sensing of habitat spatial characteristics to identify the most important drivers of the presence and biomass of six key foodfish groups
both inside and outside NTMRs in the central Philippines. We found that spatial variables
such as the extent of coral reef, the extent of seagrass beds, and the connectedness of
sites with mangrove stands were rarely significant drivers of fish presence or biomass,
regardless of the fish group’s known habitat uses. Instead, measures of benthic habitat
condition or suitability such as depth and percent cover of benthic components specifically required by each fish group were consistently better predictors of both foodfish
presence and biomass. NTMR status was also a key predictor of foodfish biomass for
5 of 6 fish groups, and a key predictor of foodfish presence for 3 of 6 fish groups. Our
results highlight the value of NTMRs in this system, and underscore the importance of
placing NTMRs in high-quality benthic habitats to ensure their conservation and fisheries
objectives can be achieved.


PROPAGATION OF SEDIMENT IMPACTS IN AN ECOLOGICALLY IMPAIRED
REEF SYSTEM (Abstract ID: 28572)
Suspended sediment and sedimentation are some of the greatest threats to coral reefs,
and these are expected to worsen with increasing land use and growth of coastal populations. Conditions of high suspended sediment concentration and sedimentation significantly alter the physical structure of coral reefs. Coral distribution becomes vertically
truncated with light attenuation, often with the replacement of reef slope habitats with
silts, and rugosity is further reduced with loss of topographically complex sensitive taxa.
This severely reduces ecological function of coral reefs, especially impairing physical
processes such as energy attenuation and in turn affecting sediment transport. Using a
combination of acoustic and optical instruments, the sediment transport characteristics
in complex flow around reefs are described. We demonstrate that low complexity, silted
reefs in Singapore, typically considered as ecological receptors in impact assessments
for activities such as dredging, can also function as a novel source of sediments to other
habitats. Recursive settlement, resuspension and transport sets up a stepping-stone
effect, propagating sediments in space- and time far beyond typical expectations of


191

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

coastal resource utilization and examine the potential and limits of archaeological data
