for constructing baselines. Considerations include analytic scale, chronological control,
sampling, and cross-disciplinary dataset integration with historical, paleontological, and
modern data. We argue greater emphasis needs to be placed on interdisciplinary studies
that parse anthropogenic from environmental change in coral reef ecosystems through
time, while recognizing such changes are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Increased
interdisciplinary collaborations of this nature in the Caribbean region will better serve
conservation efforts.

point sources in an accumulatively exacerbated manner. This potential roll-on effect
from levels of reef impairment that might be within environmental quality objectives of
stakeholders in the EIA process emphasizes the importance of considering the fate of
transport characteristics of sediment.


INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE VARIATIONS ON CORAL REEF (CHUUK ATOLL)
ACIDIFICATION IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC OCEAN (Abstract ID: 27944)
The primary goal of the present study was to explore the effects of large-scale climate
variations on the physical and biological processes that determine carbonate chemistry
of reef waters. The 7-year weekly records of carbonate chemistry conditions in the
Chuuk lagoon, located in the coral-rich western Pacific Ocean, showed that during weak
intrusion of ambient seawater from the surrounding open ocean two internal biological
processes (calcification and respiration) reinforced each other and collectively lowered
the pH of the reef water for extended periods, ranging from a few to several months. Our
study indicates that periods of low wind speeds weaken the intrusion of ambient water,
resulting in a longer residence time of reef water so that respiration and calcification
increase its acidification. This finding is not an isolated phenomenon, but may be widespread in the coral-rich western Pacific Ocean, which contains 50% of global coral reefs
and in which the degree of ambient water intrusion was found to be closely associated
with the El Niño Southern Oscillation-induced wind speed change.

INFLUENCE OF FUNCTIONAL TRAITS ON THE PERCEPTION OF CORAL REEF
An increasing body of literature suggests that functional diversity enhances ecosystem
functions such as productivity, resilience to disturbances or invasions and regulation in
the flux of matter. Numerous indices are now commonly used for assessing functional
biodiversity. They are mainly based on the values of functional traits taken by the species
in the community studied. However, the impact of functional traits on the assessment
of functional indices, and thus on our perception of functional diversity patterns, is still
poorly known. Here, we presented the first study strictly focused on the sensitivity of the
most used functional indices to the variation of the number and the nature of functional
traits. We used data on coral reef fish’s communities collected by underwater visual census in Tuamotu Archipelago (French Polynesia) to raise this issue. We found not only that
the number and the nature of functional traits may strongly alter the estimation of the
indices considered but it may also lead to counter-intuitive results. Moreover, we showed
that the extent and profile of the sensitivity of functional indices to the number of
functional traits strongly vary from one index to another. In fine our results highlight that
the properties of functional traits may have huge consequences on functional diversity
assessments and management decisions.


THE ROLE OF THE SEA CUCUMBER HOLOTHURIA SCABRA AS A CORAL REEF
ECOSYSTEM ENGINEER IN FIJI (Abstract ID: 28153)
A substantial amount of organic matter (OM) on coral reefs is mineralized in permeable
sands. Bioturbation through reef ecosystem engineers such as sea cucumbers can
potentially enhance recycling of OM in reef sands. However growing demand from
Asian markets has driven the overexploitation of sea cucumbers globally. Thus there is
a pressing need to understand the consequences their removal has on reef ecosystems.
Densities of Holothuria scabra were manipulated in enclosures in situ on a reef flat in
Natuvu, Fiji, to simulate different fishing intensities. Three treatments (n=4 treatment-1)
and Cage controls. Sedimentary oxygen consumption (SOC), organic carbon turnover,
grain size distribution, porosity, and O2 penetration depth were recorded. Additionally feeding rate, burrowing rate, and sediment reworked were quantified in relation to
Preliminary results show that natural density enclosures and cage controls were similar.
SOC rates were consistently higher in low-density than high-density enclosures. This
indicates that bioturbation by sea cucumbers plays a significant role in the capacity of
ability of reef sands to process OM pulses caused by land-derived eutrophication and
thereby decrease the overall resilience of local reefs.


THE DYNAMIC CHANGES OF REEF CORALS IN THE XUWEN CORAL REEF RESERVE AREA DURING THE PAST TEN YEARS (Abstract ID: 29213 | Poster ID: 63)
Xuwen coral reef was the only largest fringing reef in the mainland China. The status
of the coral reef in Xuwen coral reef reserved area was investigated from 2004 to
2014, and the total recorded species number was 62 in 11 families and 29 genera. Over
the past 10 years, the coral community in the reserved areas showed a great trend of
degradation, and the main type of coral species were massive, while branching coral
species becoming increasingly rare since 2004. The total recorded number of reef coral
species in the area decrease from the highest of 54 to recent of 20, and the average
living coral coverage dropped from 28.9% to about 10%. The factors impact on this coral
reef reserved area were very complex, among which the human fishery activities and
intensive aquaculture being the most important factors. We suggested that the ecological
status of coral reefs in the whole reserved area will be better if the long-term ecological
monitoring and human activities management were strengthened.



CARIBBEAN CORAL REEF BASELINES FROM AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE: PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES FOR INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES AND
CONSERVATION EFFORTS (Abstract ID: 29996)
Within the interdisciplinary study of marine historical ecology, practitioners have argued
for the importance of historical baselines to inform coral reef conservation efforts
throughout the world. Research has demonstrated the great temporal depth of anthropogenic and environmentally-derived changes among coral reef habitats, and has provided
chronological context to current coral reef conditions and projected futures. However,
in many cases, the full potential of historical coral reef baselines is yet to be realized
in terms of collaborations that present multi-dataset perspectives of coral reef deep
history. In this presentation, we discuss some of the challenges of constructing critical
temporal baselines from an archaeological perspective, focusing on the Caribbean
Antilles. Drawing on illustrative case studies, we summarize archaeological evidence of

SUPPORTING THE HOLOGENOME THEORY OF EVOLUTION: BROADCAST
SPAWNER CORAL HAS DIFFERENT STRATEGIES TO TRANSFER THEIR BACTERIA AND ZOOXANTHELLAE (Abstract ID: 29405)

192

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

A key physical characteristic of shallow coral reefs is that they are rough, resulting in
large drag that limits the strength of the flow across the reef. The flow is a key factor
determining the exchange of water and constituents between reefs and the surrounding
ocean, the residence time of water on the reef, and exchange between seawater and the
coral bed. These physical factors, in turn, influence a variety of physical and biogeochemical processes that impact coral reef ecosystems such as the supply and uptake of
nutrients and the thermal environment. Consequently, drag coefficients, relating the flow
to the drag, are a critical input for accurately modeling coral reef systems that is poorly
constrained with estimates spanning two orders of magnitude. We test the hypothesis
that the wide range of drag coefficients is due, in part, to variations in water depth using
observations from three different coral reefs (Red Sea, Palau, Dongsha Atoll) and a
previous laboratory study. The estimated drag coefficients for depth-average flow from
the field observations and laboratory study range from 0.01 to 1 and depend primarily
on water depth. Drag coefficients increase as water depth decreases consistent with
simple theory from open-channel flow. Hydrodynamic roughnesses over the coral reefs
examined generally fall in a relatively narrow range from 2 – 10 cm. Clearly, knowing the
dependence of drag coefficients on water depth is critical to understanding the impacts
of sea level rise on reefs.

The Hologenome Theory of Evolution (HTE) proposes that host and microbiota
genomes are adapted and evolved together as a unit of natural selection. In this case,
the microbiome can be transmitted from one generation to the next and, thus, may
also influence the evolution of the holobiont. Strong evidence of microbial vertical
transmission (VT) in brooding corals was reported in early larval stages of brooder corals and one broadcast spawner. To explore the VT hypothesis, colonies of the broadcast
spawner species, Mussismilia hispida, were kept in nurseries until spawning. Gamete
bundles, larvae and adult corals were analyzed to identify their microorganisms’ composition and location. The ultra-thin section transmission electron microscopy showed
Symbiodinium cells in oocytes but no bacterial profiles were detected, indicating that only
the zooxanthellae were transmitted directly from parental to the offspring. In addition,
this community was able to change, since parental colonies and oocytes hadSymbiodinium clades A, B and C, but only clade B was found in the larva. The core bacterial
communities found in the bundles, larva, and parental colonies were Burkholderia,
Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Ralstonia, Inquilinus and Bacillus, suggesting that these communities could be vertically transferred through the mucus. These data confirmed the
vertical transmission assumption stated in the HTE, also pointing at groups most likely
related to coral larvae and adult development, opening the discussion on its potential
role in coral resilience.



REVISITING THE IMPACTS OF BLEACHING ON THE REPRODUCTION OF THE
STONY CORAL MONTIPORA CAPITATA (Abstract ID: 29026 | Poster ID: 172)
Coral reefs in Hawai’i suffered two consecutive major bleaching events in 2014 and
2015 as a result of sea surface temperatures (SST) that, in places like Kāne’ohe Bay,
O’ahu, exceeded 27°C for 8 weeks and 15 weeks, respectively. In 2014, up to 73% of
the corals on reefs in Kāne’ohe Bay bleached or paled and all dominant coral species
displayed high levels of intraspecific variation in their bleaching responses. This allowed
neighboring bleached and non-bleached individuals of Montipora capitata to be identified
and tagged in 2014, so that in 2015 the size and number of eggs per bundle released in
the field by these corals could be assessed. All tagged corals released egg-sperm bundles
during the June, July, and August 2015 spawning season. There was no difference in the
size and number of eggs per bundle released by bleached and non-bleached colonies;
however, 40% more eggs were released in egg-sperm bundles in June as compared to
July and August, and these eggs were 14% smaller. In July and August 2015, mean SST
exceeded seasonal norms by 2°C and the 2015 bleaching event began. A comparison of
the 2015 spawning data with 2005, 2007, and 2008 reveals that 2015 eggs were significantly larger and significantly fewer eggs were packaged in each bundle. These bleaching
events provide an unprecedented opportunity to examine the long term implications of
repeated bleaching on the reproductive success of corals, and in this long-term study,
and beyond.

IMAGING THE UPTAKE OF NITROGEN-FIXING BACTERIA INTO LARVAE OF
THE CORAL ACROPORA MILLEPORA (Abstract ID: 27873)
Diazotrophic bacteria are instrumental in generating biologically-usable forms of
nitrogen by converting abundant dinitrogen gas (N2) into available forms, such as ammonium. While nitrogen is crucial for coral growth, direct observation of associations
between diazotrophs and corals has previously been elusive. We applied fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) and nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS)
to observe the uptake of 15N-enriched diazotrophic Vibrio sp. isolated from Acropora
millepora into conspecific coral larvae. Incorporation of Vibrio sp. cells was observed in
coral larvae after 4-hour incubation with enriched bacteria. Uptake was restricted to the
aboral epidermis of larvae, where Vibrio cells clustered in elongated aggregations. Other
bacterial associates were also observed in epidermal areas in FISH analyses. Although
the fate and role of these bacteria requires additional investigation, this study describes
a powerful approach to further explore cell associations and nutritional pathways in the
early life stages of the coral holobiont.


SEAHARMONY: AN INNOVATIVE FORUM FOR COLLABORATIVE NETWORKING
(Abstract ID: 28033 | Poster ID: 707)
seaHarmony is a web-based collaboration network that directly links ocean science
researchers with educators, managers, traditional practitioners, artists, and communicators to help them form successful collaborations. The connections are made using
compatibility algorithms based on member collaboration interests and preferences that
help define the partnership framework. Ocean science professionals can also post announcements, share resources, and ask questions about specific ocean science topics, as
well as explore posted ideas or opportunities for collaboration, such as grant proposals,
internships, workshops, or public events. A primary goal of seaHarmony is to help ocean
scientists interested in broadening the impacts of their research find potential collaborators in education, management, media, or community engagement. Created by COSEE
Island Earth, seaHarmony was launched in Hawaii in 2013, expanded nationally in 2014,
and is now available to users globally in over 240 countries. This poster will describe key
features of seaHarmony, present current data on its usage, and explore further functionalities to better serve the coral reef research community.

Rapid land clearing for agriculture and coastal development since European settlement
on the Queensland coast of Australia has brought into focus the magnitude of increased
sediment load and turbidity delivered to inshore coral reefs on the Great Barrier Reef
(GBR). However, quantifying changes in sediment flux to reefs is problematic as instrumental records are spatially and temporally limited. Long lived, annually banded massive
corals provide a unique opportunity to reconstruct environmental conditions prior to
instrumental monitoring because coral skeletons sequentially incorporate geochemical
signals that reflect ambient seawater conditions during growth. A currently under-utilised
suite of elements in coral geochemistry includes the rare earth elements (REE), of which
~90% are derived from suspended and dissolved riverine input in coastal oceanic waters.
Here we present monthly resolution REE data from four modern Porites coral cores
for terrigenous input. We show that monthly resolved time-series of total REE (ΣREE)
concentrations in corals reliably record sediment flux associated with river discharge
events at inshore locations. Our data also indicates that ΣREE concentrations are up to


CORAL REEF DRAG COEFFICIENTS – WATER DEPTH DEPENDENCE (Abstract
ID: 27960 | Poster ID: 399)
193

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

three times higher at inshore locations compared to the mid-shelf and that ΣREE concentrations associated with river discharge events have increased two-fold since ~1950.


METHODOLOGICAL UNDERESTIMATION OF NITROGEN FIXATION IN STYLOPHORA PISTILLATA (Abstract ID: 27768)


In tropical coral reef ecosystems nitrogen is a well-described limiting nutrient and its
tight cycling implicated as a central component of Darwin’s “paradox of the reef” where
ambient concentrations of dissolved inorganic nitrogen are very low. On tropical coral
reefs the primary source of “new” nitrogen can only be obtained by nitrogen fixation
conducted by both photoautotrophic and heterotrophic prokaryotes. Nitrogen fixing prokaryotes are widespread in coral microbiomes and both historical and recent data have
demonstrated that corals can fix nitrogen. Methodologically, both acetylene reduction
and isotopic tracers have been used to quantify nitrogen fixation. Although it has been
suggested that isotopic tracers are a superior approach because labeled products can be
followed through various compartments, many recent isotopic experiments quantifying
nitrogen fixation have observed significant underestimations for rates of nitrogen fixation
in the open ocean. This discrepancy stems from the use of the “bubble technique” versus
“constant enrichment”, where the latter provides a more accurate approximation of
nitrogen fixation rates. Here we present data using the “constant enrichment” technique
demonstrating that the Great Barrier reef coral, Stylophora pistillata, does in fact fix
nitrogen, although previous studies using the “bubble technique” suggested otherwise.
We also present evidence that the isotopically labeled end products are primarily found
described previously. We hypothesize that the coral microbiome, and not mucous, is the
source of this fixed “new” nitrogen.

CARBONATE DYNAMICS OF AN ALGAL RIDGE (Abstract ID: 29798)
This study aims to clarify the processes producing cementation on and within tropical
algalridge environments. Specifically we aim to determine: 1) whether net calcification
is occurring atop the algal-ridge on a diurnal timeframe; 2) the redox nature of the algalridge framework interior; 3) if sulphate reduction is driving ridge cementation; and 4) the
stoichiometry and rate of carbonate calcification and dissolution reactions on/within the
algal ridge. We will use state-of-the-art high precision isotope dilution inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry techniques to analyse small anomalies in [Ca2+] and [Mg2+]
(<0.4 μML-1 and <3 μML-1 respectively). We will test the hypothesis that despite ocean
acidification (OA) algal ridges are still undergoing cementation. Within the ridge framework
we expect the remineralisation of high Mg-calcite (HMC) into more stable carbonate
minerals (calcite or dolomite) to be driven by the reduction of sulphate. This would imply
that reefs with HMC algal ridges are less susceptible to OA than previously thought.


IMPACT OF NUTRIENT, SEAWAGE AND CONTAMINANT PRESSURES ON
THE WATER QUALITY OF A FRENCH POLYNESIAN REEF LAGOON (FAAROA,
RAIATEA ISLAND) (Abstract ID: 28975 | Poster ID: 463)

SYMBIODINIUM EXPOSED: COMPARATIVE TRANSCRIPTOMICS REVEALS
GENETIC BASIS OF THERMAL TOLERANCE (Abstract ID: 30064)

Coral reefs are among the most diverse and productive ecosystems, sustaining important
coasts, the anthropogenic impacts on these reefs have increased dramatically in the last
30 years. In French Polynesia, the reef lagoon of Faaroa (Raiatea island) is exposed to
contamination caused by inefficient and/or inappropriate sewage treatment, erosion
from agricultural activities, eutrophication and pesticide use. The aim of this study is
twofold: (i) to characterize the main domestic and agricultural pressures exerted on
the reef lagoon of Faaroa through personal interview surveys and GIS analyses ; (ii) to
assess the water quality of the lagoon through biological and chemical analyses of the
water column and sediment, and the study of phytoplankton which plays a critical role in
tropical reef lagoons, and will contribute to improve the conservation and management
of these vulnerable ecosystems.

Different putative species as well as conspecific populations of Symbiodinium exhibit
a range of thermal tolerances that can determine the bleaching susceptibility of their
coral hosts. However, the underlying gene regulation governing thermal tolerance in
Symbiodinium is entirely unknown. Through physiological assays and transcriptomics,
we compared the heat stress responses of a thermo-tolerant versus a thermo-sensitive
population of type C1 Symbiodinium in culture. After 9 days at elevated temperature,
neither population experienced physiological stress, but both displayed up-regulation
of meiosis genes and down-regulation of metabolism genes. After 13 days at elevated
temperature, the thermo-sensitive population suffered a loss of photosynthetic efficiency
and an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) leakage from its cells whereas the
thermo-tolerant population still showed no signs of physiological stress. Accordingly,
only the thermo-tolerant population achieved transcriptional acclimation to elevated
temperature by up-regulating an array of ROS scavenging, molecular chaperone,
and metabolism genes. More transcripts of eukaryotic viral origin had also become
up-regulated at elevated temperature in the thermo-sensitive population than in the
thermo-tolerant population. The correlated physiological and transcriptional heat stress
responses observed in our study tightly align with the known bleaching responses of corals harboring these same populations. Thus, we provide substantial, novel insights into
the complex molecular mechanisms that underpin coral bleaching.


CORAL HEALTH IN THE PAST: A PRE-HUMAN BASELINE FROM PARTIAL
MORTALITY RECORDS IN THE PLEISTOCENE OF BARBADOS AND CURACAO
(Abstract ID: 28180 | Poster ID: 12)
Coral skeletons archive corallite growth history and therefore partial mortality over tens
to hundreds of years. As a result, ancient coral skeletons can provide a proxy for reef
health by examining the frequency of partial mortality that resulted from stressors such
as disease and bleaching. This study examines 3700 large (.5m-3m) Pleistocene corals in
living position from Curacao and Barbados spanning six reef-building intervals (80-450
kya) in order to establish a pre-human baseline for partial mortality and coral health in
Caribbean reef corals. For all species and all time intervals partial mortality is low (<5%).
Orbicella annularis complex, and Acropora palmatahad slightly higher average incidences
overall (both 4%), than other massive species (Pseudodiploria strigosa, Sideratrea siderea,
Colpophyllia natans, Montastrea cavernosa). Fast growing corals with complex morphology (eg.,Acropora cervicornis) were not included. Observed examples of partial mortality
and regrowth were small and local and we observed no examples of significant
White Band Disease. Very low partial mortality of Caribbean corals throughout the Pleistocene provides a pre-human baseline that is in strong contrast to recent Caribbean reefs
where disease and bleaching have led to widespread partial mortality of many or most
larger corals alive today.


DEFINING ‘COMMUNITY’ FOR COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN MARINE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN HAWAI’I (Abstract ID: 27882 | Poster ID: 610)
Community involvement in marine and coral reef resource management is viewed by
many as critical to achieving long term conservation success, and is a stated priority for
local management agencies in the state of Hawai’i. Numerous programs now exist to
promote active community stewardship, including formal co-management arrangements
through the Community-based Subsistence Fishing Area legislation, partnerships with
the State’s marine enforcement unit through community Makai Watch programs, and
numerous other formal and informal community based management programs. But
working with communities to facilitate marine management is complex, and definitions
of exactly who “communities” are and who should be included vary. This study explores
definitions of community and community involvement in marine resource management
in the state of Hawai’i. First, we present the results of a Hawai’i – wide survey which
asked state residents how they defined “community” in relation to coral reef management. Second, we explore how these definitions relate to the wide range of actual
194

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

community-based marine management program taking place in the state of Hawai’i,
with a focus on case examples on Hawai’i Island. Finally, we discuss the implications of
these varying definitions and practices for community-based management practice in
Hawai’i and beyond.

oscillating in a 12 h cycle. All the potential core circadian clock genes displayed a 24 h
cycle in both symbiotic and aposymbiotic morphs. Here for the first time we can now
distinguish both circadian and circatidal patterns in the Aiptasia, detected at both the
behavioral and molecular levels.



ECOLOGICAL SPECIALIZATION AND SPECIES DIVERSIFICATION OF SHALLOW WATER CORAL ENDOSYMBIONTS IN THE WESTERN ATLANTIC (Abstract
ID: 29427)

LOOKING BACK TO LOOK FORWARD: AN EVOLUTION OF ACROPORA RESTORATION TECHNIQUES (Abstract ID: 29847 | Poster ID: 478)

In the Caribbean region, Symbiodinium belonging to Clade B are ecologically dominant in
coral communities from shallow reef habitats. Several species in Clade B were recently
described, yet genetic evidence indicates that many more remain uncharacterized. In this
study, we investigate the diversity among members of a putative Pleistocene adaptive
radiation exhibiting distinct ecological distributions. While many of these share identical
rDNA sequences, rapidly evolving DNA suggest that multiple species exist. In testing this
possibility, we sampled numerous taxa of reef-building coral across large geographical
ranges and used microsatellite variation to test for recent sexual recombination. Strong
genetic partitioning between sympatric populations indicates reproductive isolation.
investigations show how fine-scale phylogenetic and population genetic evidence reveals
cryptic diversity, emphasizes the importance of niche diversification in the speciation
of Symbiodinium, and serves as an example where the co-evolution with a single host
species or monophyletic lineage leads to host-symbiont specificity.

During the last three decades reef-building corals have declined drastically. Restoration efforts have focused on innovative techniques for the propagation and growth of
individual corals, as well as their outplanting to bolster remaining coral populations. The
efficacy of these techniques varies greatly as well as their appropriateness for large-scale
restoration efforts. The Coral Restoration Foundation has been engaged in developing
practical techniques for regional reef restoration within the Florida Keys and the Caribbean. The focus of our efforts is to develop methods that result in outplants with a high
level of success, are cost effective (in terms of surviving biomass outplanted), scalable
for large production efforts, and able to be implemented by locally engaged volunteers
for project sustainability. Herein we present an overview of the techniques that have
been developed, including their origin, and the lessons learned along the way. Focusing
on Acropora spp., details of various outplanting methodologies are presented, contrasting their appropriateness for large-scale restoration projects. Also reviewed are the corresponding nursery techniques that either support, or constrain, outplanting application.


A NEW PERSPECTIVE: ASSESSING THE SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF CORAL
BLEACHING WITH LOW-ALTITUDE REMOTE SENSING TECHNOLOGIES
(Abstract ID: 28874)

SEASONAL GROWTH AND CALCIFICATION RATES OF CORALLINE ALGAE ON
THE GREAT BARRIER REEF AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN EFFECTIVE IN
SITU STAINING METHOD (Abstract ID: 29039)

Coral bleaching is contributing to the decline of reefs globally. Efficient reef monitoring,
which provides information for effective management and conservation strategies, is
vital to better understand the extent and severity of bleaching on coral reefs. Current in
situ and remote sensing reef assessment techniques are time, money, and personnelintensive. Consistent surveys of large reef areas using traditional techniques are
unfeasible, unavailable, or uninformative at the colony level. We present a new technique
using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) that targets an intermediate spatial scale while
providing sufficient information at the colony level to understand bleaching distributions
of coral communities on patch reefs in Kaneohe Bay, Oahu during the 2015 bleaching event. Images were collected at four reefs during the bleaching period and were
processed using StructureFromMotion techniques to produce georeferenced, spatially
accurate orthomosaics of reef areas. Mosaics were analyzed using manual or automated
classification schemes to identify benthic substrate and bleaching distribution. We found
bleached colonies had random or clumped distributions on Kaneohe Bay patch reefs.
Our work demonstrates that UAVs provide a low cost, efficient platform that can rapidly
and repeatedly collect high-resolution imagery (1 cm) and map large areas of shallow
reef ecosystems (5 hectares). We envision that similar low altitude aerial surveys would
be incorporated as standard components of shallow-water reef studies, especially on
reefs too dangerous or remote for in situ surveys.

Coralline algae not only play crucial roles in reef ecology but have also been identified
as one of the most sensitive calcifying organisms to ocean acidification, and a potential
indicator for the effects of climate change. However, despite their importance little
information is available on coralline growth and calcification rates on the Great Barrier
Reef (GBR). The current lack of information on growth and calcification is partly due
to the difficulty in obtaining field measurements. Therefore the aims of this study were
to establish an effective method of gaining growth measurements in the field, and to
determine seasonal growth and calcification rates of an abundant reef building crustose
markers at different concentrations and exposure times on two abundant species of encrusting and branching corallines found on the GBR (Porolithon onkodes and Lithophyllum
taking vertical growth, marginal growth and buoyant weight measurements. Results from
these experiments found calcein to be the most effective calcium marker in the field,
and the optimal season for growth and calcification differed across the three metrics
measured. Determining these baseline seasonal rates can assist in improving conservation and management practices, refining carbonate budgets, and to better understand
the response of corallines to manipulative experiments concerning ocean acidification
and warming.



‘MASTER-SLAVE’ OSCILLATOR RELATIONSHIP IN SYMBIOTIC AIPTASIA
(Abstract ID: 28565)

MARINE HOTSPOTS THROUGH TIME: WHAT CORAL FOSSILS CAN REVEAL
ABOUT THE LOCATION AND ORIGINS OF THE CORAL TRIANGLE (Abstract ID:
29917)

Since life first evolved in the sea, an ecosystem that is governed by a multitude of environmental cycles, species inhabiting coastal environments are challenged with complex
temporal patterns, dominated by tidal and lunar cycles. Aiptasia provide a strong model
for dissecting the roles of solar, tidal and lunar oscillations. A relevant question is how
the presence or absence of the symbiotic algae affects Aiptasia endogenous clock.
Recently we used symbiotic and aposymbiotic Aiptasia morphs to measure behavioral
activity and transcriptomic for temporal gene expression. Very interestingly, our Fourier
Transform analysis showed that symbiotic Aiptasia had a period cycle of 23.9 h while
the aposymbiotic morphs had a locomotor activity of 12.2 h. Reinfection the aposymbiotic Aiptasia with algae and re-measure the behavior “rescued” the rhythm to a period
cycle of 23.9 h under LD cycle. Additionally, transcriptomic analysis of material from our
4 hourly samplings, revealed a pattern similar to that given by the behavioral measurements, where the symbiotic anemones had a higher number of temporal expression
genes with a 24 h cycle, while the aposymbiotic forms showed significantly more genes

Indo-Pacific diversity increases from the periphery to the Coral Triangle (CT), the
global center of marine biodiversity. There are three main hypotheses to explain this
pattern: Center of Origin, Accumulation, and Overlap. The relative importance of these
hypotheses can be inferred with direct and indirect methods. Indirect approaches, such
as phylogenetics, cladistic biogeography, and phylogeography increase our understanding
of processes generating CT diversity, but fossil occurrences are the only direct record of
the origin, duration, and demise of a taxon. Although the fossil record shows the hotspot
moved from the Tethys Sea to its current location in the Early Miocene, little is known
about the origin and spread of coral taxa themselves. To address this, we use fossil
occurrence data for scleractinian corals to characterize the changing location of coral
hotspots through the Cenozoic, the location of the first occurrence of coral taxa found in

195

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

ment of coral reef resources, and the propagation and direct restoration of coral reefs.
In the US Virgin Islands, the concepts of these two programs were combined, resulting
in the Virgin Islands Reef Resilience Plan (VIRRP). Developed through the TNC/NOAA
cooperative agreement, the VIRRP was designed with programs and initiatives to better
understand and manage for bleaching and other coral reef disturbances, reduce fishing
pressure on important reef fish species, and enhance reef sites through coral restoration
activities. Moreover, the BleachWatch Virgin Islands Program, the Reef Responsible
Sustainable Seafood Initiative, and the USVI Coral Restoration Program all have significant community components. This active engagement through outreach and volunteer
opportunities has helped to better connect Virgin Islanders to coral reefs and has created
support for our coral reef conservation efforts. By working to understand and manage
coral reef impacts while actively restoring key coral reef sites, we anticipate that the
VIRRP will help to build the resilience of coral reefs in the US Virgin Islands.

each hotspot through time, and the extinction/origination rates of coral lineages. These
analyses directly test hypotheses about the spatial origins of Indo-Pacific taxa as well
fossil data already available, there are inherent problems associated with an unavoidably patchy record, such as accurate species determination in a taxonomically unstable
group. We use genera as a taxonomic unit to mitigate current coral taxonomy issues.
We discuss causal factors in the formation of the CT and hope it will be of use in global
conservation planning.

GREATER DIVERSITY IN SYMBIONT TYPES WITHIN FLORIDA DENDROGYRA
CYLINDRUS: PERSISTENT SHIFT IN DOMINANT SYMBIONT SUB-TYPES AND
EVIDENCE OF CRYPTIC NOVEL CLADE (Abstract ID: 29745)


Most scleractinian corals form stable symbioses with dinoflagellates,Symbiodinium spp,
typically with a single dominant symbiont type. The Caribbean Pillar coral, Dendrogyra
cylindrus, harbors ITS2-B1/cp23S-B184 symbiont as its dominant type. Following a
mass hyper-thermal event in August and September 2014 along the Florida Reef Tract,
characterized monthly during four months of recovery. Two operational taxonomic units
(OTU0.03) representing B1 phylotypes accounted for > 80% of the relative abundance
in symbiont populations prior to thermal bleaching. Shift in dominance of one OTU B1
subtype from <10% pre-bleaching to >50% post bleaching occurred at a site, which
recovered more rapidly than sites that did not shift Symbiodiniumcomposition. Evidence
of cryptic Clade A symbionts (Symbiodinium necroappetens) in low abundance prior to
bleaching (<0.1%) were found to temporarily increase in relative abundance to 3.5% during early recovery, suggesting an opportunistic growth with an unknown functional role
than previously known and the ability to shift to potentially more favorable symbiont
types. Previously undetected diversity within symbiont communities of a single coral
host may impart ecological benefits, providing a measure of resilience to environmental
stressors linked with climate change for this coral species.

COMPARATIVE EXPERIMENTS ON 8 NEARSHORE HAWAIIAN CORAL REEFS:
SPATIAL VARIATION IN THE ENVIRONMENTAL DRIVERS OF REEF DEVELOPMENT (Abstract ID: 30044)
Several biological and physical factors influence the development of benthic coral reef
communities; however, the importance of different factors remains an important question
for understanding the dynamics of a given system. We used standard PVC tiles (CAUs) to
explore spatial variation in community development (36-mo.) on 8 shallow (2-3 m) coral
examine the influence of consumers and each of the 8 sites were characterized according
to 3 known drivers of nearshore reef dynamics: sediment exposure, herbivore abundance,
and nutrient availability. Spatial variation in algal biomass accumulation, coral recruitment,
and net accretion of calcium carbonate were compared (a) among sites, (b) among caged
vs. open tiles, and (c) in relation to environmental conditions. Macroalgal biomass varied
greatly among sites and a site x treatment interaction indicated variable consumer affects
among sites. Recruitment varied among sites and appeared to be inversely related to sediment exposure. Open tiles always accreted greater calcium carbonate than caged tiles,
indicative of a positive relationship with consumer exposure. Benthic dynamics on these
coral reefs appear to be driven by different ecological processes, suggesting that managers
may need to examine the specific drivers of local-regional dynamics in order to maximize
the effectiveness of specific conservation efforts.



GENETIC SLEUTHING: TRAIL OF SHIFTING MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES
DURING WHITE PLAGUE OUTBREAK IN DENDROGYRA CYLINDRUS ON THE
FLORIDA REEF TRACT (Abstract ID: 30032)

UNCOVERING THE UNSEEN: IMAGING AND COLLECTION TECHNIQUES
REVEAL DENSE COMMUNITIES OF CRYPTIC INVERTEBRATES ON HAWAIIAN
CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 30067)

White plague disease has significantly affected Caribbean corals over the last two decades. This disease syndrome is characterized by rapid tissue loss leaving behind dead,
white coral skeleton. While three types of white plague have been recognized based
on how quickly the disease progresses, the pathogens that trigger this disease have not
been identified with certainty. Following the Summer 2014 hyperthermal event along the
Florida Reef Tract (FRT), we monitored an outbreak of white plage II (WPII) from the
early onset of the disease affecting the Pillar coral Dendrogyra cylindrus. In order to identify potential disease-causing agents, changes of the microbial communities were tracked
during five-month progression of the outbreak in in this coral species on a reef site in the
FRT using 454 high-throughput sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. Multivariate analyses
comparing the microbial communities of the same coral colonies before and after showing signs of disease, compared with coral colonies that remained healthy throughout the
entire outbreak, showed both an influence of sampling time and a clear effect of disease
condition. Strong correlations were found between the appearance of white plague
disease and highly abundant bacterial species from the genus Sphingobium, Sphingomonas andPseudoalteromonas. Follow up studies using isolates cultured from active white
plague colonies in trial infections will allow confirming the actual pathogen or group of
pathogens causing the disease from among these identified bacterial candidates.

Inconspicuous motile invertebrates (cryptofauna) are ubiquitous, important components
of benthic marine ecosystems worldwide; however, relatively little is known about
their ecology on coral reefs. We used two methods, time-lapse imaging and artificial
structures, to quantify patterns in density and community composition of cryptofauna
(CAUs) were deployed at eight sites across 60 km of Maui’s leeward coast to examine
spatial variability in cryptofauna community structure and the influence of consumers,
and a novel time-lapse imaging technique was used to compare communities on four
dominant habitat types on natural reef substrata. CAUs demonstrated strong effects of
site and caging on cryptofauna, and the effect of consumers was highly site-specific and
correlated with variation in macroalgal biomass. Time-lapse imaging revealed significant
variation in cryptofauna communities among coral-, algae-, and sediment-dominated
habitats. Maximum densities (approximately 2000/m2) and community structure were
generally similar between the two methods; however, the methods differed greatly
in their strengths and utility, with time-lapse photography proving to be a promising
technique for rapid assessments of cryptofauna communities. Given their high density
and diversity, it is critical that we continue to develop effective methods for assessing
community structure and function of cryptofauna in coral reef ecosystems.



THE VIRGIN ISLANDS REEF RESILIENCE PLAN: A MULTI-FACETED APPROACH
29673)
Over the past decade, The Nature Conservancy has lead two efforts to directly improve
the quality of coral reefs throughout the Caribbean. Coral reef resilience and restoration
programs have been focused on the removal/reduction of stressors, improved manage-

196

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

DETERMINING THE MOST DETRIMENTAL SEDIMENT ON CORAL REEFS:
TRACING THE SEDIMENT ON THE REEF BACK TO A CATCHMENT SOURCE
(Abstract ID: 29308)
We present a conceptual framework that determines the fate and impacts of sediment
on marine ecosystems using the Burdekin River, Australia as a case study. We identify
the most detrimental sediment to marine ecosystems and trace it back into the catchment to highlight the dominant sub-catchments, erosion processes and management
practices that are delivering the excess sediment. We show evidence that Burdekin River
discharge, and a portion of the associated particulate constituents, influences photic
depth and turbidity on the Great Barrier Reef. Supressed photic depth over a period of
time caused negative effects on coral reefs and seagrass meadows in the region. The
sediment delivered from the Burdekin River that influences turbidity regimes is finegrained (<16 µm) and is transported as organic-rich floc aggregates in flood plumes. The
Bowen and Upper Burdekin sub-catchments contribute the highest loads of the <16 µm
sediment fraction to the end-of-catchment and tracing data suggest that erosion rates in
these catchments have increased by 7.5 and 3.6 fold, respectively since European settlement. The major erosion sources in these catchments are sub-surface erosion of scalds,
rills, gullies and streambanks. Maintaining long term ground and riparian cover above
70% (in particular on soils identified as erodible) is considered important for maintaining the hydrological function of these landscapes and reducing sediment erosion and
delivery from all erosion sources. Controlling livestock access to rilled and gullied areas
and streambanks is a priority action to achieve this

POTENTIAL MECHANISMS OF INTENSIVE AQUACULTURE EFFLUENTS ON A
CORAL REEF IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA: IN SITU STUDIES (Abstract ID: 27827)
Little is known of the potential impacts and mechanisms of intensive fish farming on
coral reefs. This study investigated the relations of live corals with Ulva blooms and
environmental parameters along a natural gradient from aquaculture ponds in Sanya Bay.
Daily dissolved oxygen fluctuated dramatically from 1.96 mg l-1 in the morning to 15.26
mg l-1 in the afternoon. Redundancy analysis showed that Ulva coverage, DO, temperature and turbidity can significantly and negatively explain the coral’s distribution in 2013
and 2014. Higher partial coral mortality were recorded close to the outlet. Significantly
lower rETRmax were detected on Favia sp. which was covered by Ulva spp. These
resluts suggested that Ulva overgrowth, light shedding and physical abrasion may have
caused the coral’s physiological stress. High level of dissolved organic carbon was likely
linked to severe hypoxia in the morning, which was probably one of chief mechanisms
for the coral tissue mortality.

CAN CORALS REVEAL LAND-USE CHANGE?: TRACE ELEMENT AND ISOTOPIC
RECORDS SUGGEST PATTERNS OF LAND-USE CHANGE IN THE REPUBLIC OF
This project uses trace element and isotopic analysis of coral cores to investigate
land-use activities in two watershed systems in Palau: Ngeremeduu Bay and Airai Bay.
Previous studies have shown increased sedimentation in these bays, which may be
correlated to earth-moving projects. Characterization of land-use change impacts on
Palau’s important watersheds and reef systems is needed to inform management decisions. Coral cores (20-41cm in length) were sampled along a high-to-low sedimentation
gradient: near major rivers (high-impact) and ocean (low-impact). The samples were
measured for isotopic indicators of environmental conditions: salinity and temperature
(δ18O) and light (δ13C). The δ18O and δ13C values (% VPDB) ranged from -5.0 to -6.0
(δ18O) & -2.5 to -6.0 (δ13C) in high-impact sites and -5.5 to -6.5 & -2.5 to -3.5 in lowimpact sites. The results indicate an isotopic transition along the high-to-low sedimentation gradient suggesting increased freshwater in Ngeremeduu Bay. The periods of lowest
carbon fixation (correlated with low δ13C values) occur in high-impact sites, suggesting
light-depleted conditions. Airai Bay shows a recent shift to more positive values (-4.5 to
-5.5 & -1.75 to -2.25) after a period of sharp change in the isotopic signals. These spatial
and temporal variations may correlate with land-use change patterns. Trace element
data, including Barium to Calcium ratio, also will be presented to elucidate sedimentation dynamics and impacts of large-scale earth moving events on reef systems.

THE EPIGENETIC REGULATION OF THE CNIDARIAN-DINOFLAGELLATE SYMBIOSIS (Abstract ID: 28776)
The symbiotic relationship between cnidarians and dinoflagellates is a keystone of
the coral reef ecosystem. Despite the ecological importance of this relationship,
comparatively little is known about the genes and pathways involved in the initiation and
maintenance of this symbiosis. The sea anemone Aiptasia is an emerging model to study
the molecular basis of the cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis, because it also harbors
intracellular Symbiodinium like corals, but can be reared with and without symbionts.
In this study, we determined changes in DNA methylation using whole genome bisulfite
sequencing of symbiotic and aposymbiotic Aiptasia in order to gain insight into epigenetic mechanisms that regulate the cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis. We identified more
than 1,300 differentially methylated genes between different symbiotic states. Functional
analysis of these genes highlighted several significantly enriched biological processes
including immunity, apoptosis, phagocytosis recognition, and phagosome formation.
Interestingly, these processes involve previously identified candidate genes from expression and protein screens as well as new genes with potentially important functions in
symbiont recognition, apoptotic cell clearance, and nutrient and metabolite exchange.
Our data indicate that aspects of cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbioses are under epigenetic control. Further experiments elucidating the correlation of DNA methylation data
with mRNA expression data are expected to provide additional insight into the biological
role of DNA methylation in cnidarians.


MONITORING AND SPATIAL-TEMPORAL ANALYSIS OF CORAL REEF BASED
ON MULTI-DATA (Abstract ID: 29372)


Xisha Islands, the largest archipelago in the islands of South China Sea, has abundant
natural resources. The coral reefs on the Islands are typical oceanic and are the oldest
and rarest ones in China. They have immeasurable social and economic values. The
future of the coral reef ecosystems on the islands is worrying under the pressures from
humankind activities and global warming, although they have a wide scale of self-adaptation abilities. So it should be now on the calendar to carry out the monitoring of Coral
Reef,especially coral reef bleaching . In this paper, by using methods of object-oriented
classification and Normalized Spectral Mixing Analysis Model, based on multi-source
Remote sensing data, such as Landsat, SPOT, Quikbird, IKNOS, we obtain spatial distribution map of coral reef and coral reef bleaching. To be more scientific and convincible
for research, we carry out accuracy validation by using field investigation data, analysis
spatial dynamic changes and explore reasons lead to those patterns. The results are not
only enable to understand real-time monitoring with multi-source images, but also are
significant in monitoring of coral reef and coral reef bleaching by using remote sensing
technology, in development and protection of the coral reef resources of Xisha Islands.

TISSUE LIGHT GRADIENTS SHAPE PHOTOSYNTHETIC ACCLIMATION IN
CORAL SYMBIONTS (Abstract ID: 28307)
Coral reefs form some of the most diverse and productive ecosystems on Earth. They
are limited to habitats with appropriate light conditions, but inhabit a wide span of
light-exposed habitats from shallow reef flats to shaded caves because they are able to
optimize the internal light environment for their endosymbionts. The regulation of internal
light-field serves to either filter out excess light harmful to the algae, or to increase the
photon flux reaching the algae in sun-exposed or shaded environments. There are several
ways by which the coral host optimizes the light environment for its endosymbionts,
pigments, host pigment conversion of short-wave radiation to longer wavelengths, which
are more efficient for photosynthetic conversion, or increasing the internal photon flux

197

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

density in the tissue by scattering and skeleton reflection. We studied the photophysiology
of the oral and aboral layers of symbiotic algae of the coral Montastrea curta to investigate if different acclimation to light exist in hospite on polyp scale. We show that the
light perceived in the two layers differed >2-fold, and that this change in light facilitates different quantum yield and photosynthetic electron transport in the oral vs. aboral symbiont
layer. This has important implications for the understanding of coral symbiont resilience
towards high light stress, and demonstrates that the coral holobiont may exhibit canopylike properties in respect to spatial microgradients of light and chemical parameters.

A BENCHMARK FOR COVER AND GENERIC DIVERSITY IN PHILIPPINE REEFS
(Abstract ID: 28328 | Poster ID: 425)
Benchmarks for metrics such as hard coral cover and diversity are needed for better
inferences on reef status, and how these reefs are responding to environmental changes,
disturbances, and management interventions. We provide benchmarks based on
coral cover and generic diversity in the Tubbataha Reefs, the largest no-take marine
protected area and best managed reef in the Philippines. The reef slopes of Tubbataha
are monitored annually in a hierarchical manner with random transects embedded in
fixed stations, stations embedded in sites, and sites within this one location. Coral cover
(mean= 34%, sd=1.7) and number of coral genera in the reef slopes of the Tubbataha
reefs have changed little at the location and site level from 2012 to 2015. However,
these parameters greatly vary spatially. Most (71%) of the variation in coral cover is
at the among site level, 9% at the among station level, and 20% at the among transect
level. In contrast, total variability in number of coral genera is mostly due to among
transect variation, some among station variation, and hardly any among site variation.
These averages and patterns in variability over various spatial scales provide us good
bases to guide interpretation of results of assessments and monitoring done elsewhere
in the Philippines and the Coral Triangle.



TEMPERATURE AND FOOD AVAILABILITY AFFECT ASSESSMENT OF PREDATION RISK BY JUVENILE CORAL REEF FISH (Abstract ID: 28566)
Risk assessment in ectotherms is strongly affected by an organism’s energy expenditure
and acquisition because these will alter the motivation to feed, which is balanced against
antipredator behaviours. Temperature and food availability are known to affect the
physiological condition of ectotherms, but how interactions between these variables may
influence predator–prey dynamics is still poorly understood. This study examined the
interactive effects of food availability and temperature on the trade-offs between predator avoidance behaviour and foraging in juveniles of a marine damselfish, Pomacentrus
chrysurus. Predator avoidance behaviour was tested by exposing fish to chemical alarm
cues obtained from skin extract of conspecifics. When detected, these cues elicit an antipredator response in fish, typically characterized by decreased foraging. Fish maintained
under high food ration displayed distinct antipredator responses to chemical alarm cues,
regardless of temperature. However, fish maintained in conditions of low food ration and
3 °C above ambient temperature did not display an antipredator response when exposed
to chemical alarm cues, whereas those in ambient temperature did. These results suggest
that individuals in low physiological condition because of limited food availability are
more susceptible to increased temperature and may therefore take greater risks under
predation threats to satisfy their energetic requirements. Projected business-as-usual
climate change scenario adds urgency for more research on this topics.

INITIAL FINDINGS OF THE 2014-2015 NATIONWIDE ASSESSMENT OF PHILIPPINE CORAL REEFS: NEW BENCHMARKS (Abstract ID: 28458 | Poster ID: 429)
A nationwide coral reef assessment was initiated in the Philippines in 2014 for a period
of three years to update the status of reef benthos in the country. Randomly selected
fringing reefs were sampled, stratified by the total area of reefs in each of six biogeographic zones. A phototransect method involving five randomly deployed 50-m transects
was used to assess the cover of benthic categories in each station. Initial data up to 2015
covered a total of 80 stations (65 in Luzon, 5 in Visayas, and 10 in Mindanao), sampled
across 14 provinces. The calculated average hard coral cover (HCC) was 24.7% (95%
CI: 21.8, 27.7). This is comparable with HCC found by others in the Indo-Pacific region.
Also, results revealed high coral diversity (average number of taxonomic amalgamation
units = 31) despite low HCC in several stations. Using empirically-based benchmarks for
categorizing reef condition using HCC (0-22% for poor, >22-33% for fair, >33-44% for
good, and >44% for excellent), most (46%) surveyed stations were generally found to be
in poor condition. These initial findings provide a firm basis for the revision of policies
concerning the conservation and management of Philippine coral reefs.

EPIGENETIC CHANGES IN THE CORAL STYLOPHORA PISTILLATA IN RESPONSE
TO LONG-TERM OCEAN ACIDIFICATION (Abstract ID: 28563)
Coral reefs are in rapid decline, chiefly from anthropogenic factors. As corals have a long
likely play a large part in coping with long-term stresses, in tandem with natural selection.
There is indirect indication that methylation regulate transcriptional noise in the coral
Acropora milleporabased on the assumption that methylated genes had lower amounts
of CpG dinucleotides. However, large-scale, direct evidence describing the methylation
states of coral genes from whole genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS) has, so far, been
lacking. In our work, we chose the Red Sea coralStylophora pistillata to study changes in
the methylation landscape in response to ocean acidification. We obtained WGBS data
on coral nubbins grown in aquaria for two years in controlled conditions with only the
pCO2altered to simulate projected acidities of the world’s oceans. We have identified a

198

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

number of genes that undergo differential methylation in more acidic conditions, and
some of the genes are thought to regulate calcification and bone mineralisation. This
is in agreement with the phenotypic changes observed in the corals grown under more
acidic conditions, as growth rates of the corals remain constant while the skeleton
structure was more porous and less dense. Correlations drawn between gene expression
and their corresponding methylation patterns provide further support for observed
phenotypic adaptations in response to prolonged ocean acidification.

SPAWNING PATTERNS DIFFER BETWEEN ACROPORA AND MERULINID CORALS (Abstract ID: 28302)
Spawning patterns of scleractinian corals were examined in situ at Lyudao, southeastern
Taiwan in 2010–2015. Spawnings of a total of 47 species were recorded. In the genus
Acropora (including 13 species), annual spawning occurred on a single night, 3–11 days
after the full moon mostly in May. In contrast, in the massive coral family Merulinidae
(including 16 species from six genera, Dipsastraea, Favites, Hydnophora, Leptoria,
Goniastrea and Platygyra), annual spawning occurred continuously over 2–3 nights and
always around the last quarter moon in April and May. Moreover, spawning of Acropora
corals usually occurred on an earlier lunar day at southern coast than at northern coast,
but merulinid corals spawned in the same timing of lunar days (around the last quarter
moon) between the coasts. The different spawning timing of Acropora corals between
the coasts may be caused by different local environmental conditions between the
the different spawning patterns of Acropora and merulinid corals and suggested different
regulatory mechanisms determining their spawning timing.


TOWARDS NETWORKING OF NATIONAL PROTECTED AREAS FOR THE CONSERVATION OF CRITICAL HABITATS OF GREEN SEA TURTLE POPULATIONS IN
THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29264 | Poster ID: 646)


The establishment of local MPAs and networks for the conservation of coastal ecosystems and fishery management is widely practiced in the Philippines. Some networks
are established on the basis of ecological connectivity among MPAs, while others are
networks for learning and complementation of coastal resources management activities.
Under the cooperation of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines in the SSME, over 10
protected areas across the 3 countries, known to support different life stages of green
sea turtles from the same population, are envisioned to form a transboundary network.
The Biodiversity Management Bureau and its partners are in the process of establishing
the Philippine part of the transboundary MPA network. The process involves developing
institutional systems for the operationalization of the network, including improving
management effectiveness in each site and strengthening enforcement through better
communication and coordination. It also engages other sectors and institutions for
advancing sea turtle research and building capacities to address the conservation needs
for effective management of sea turtle habitats and to promote sustainable fisheries
management in the selected sites. This is a new initiative for the country since this is the
1st networking of national protected areas based on linked habitats critical of a particular population of the endangered green turtle, Chelonia mydas. The initiative contributes

DO DIFFERENT SEAGRASS SPECIES SUPPORT UNIQUE BENTHIC MACROFAUNAL COMMUNITIES? (Abstract ID: 28536)
Structural complexity is often considered to be responsible for the high biodiversity associated with seagrass beds. This study aimed to examine the effects of different seagrass
species on the abundance and community structure of benthic macrofauna. Sediment
cores were taken from monoculture beds of five seagrass species in Dongsha Island, a
remote atoll in the South China Sea, including Cymodocea serrulata (CS), Cymodocea
rotundata (CR), Halodule uninervis (HU), Syringodium isoetifolium (SI), and Thalassia
hemprichii (TH) across four seasons. HU and SI demonstrated higher shoot density, but
TH, CR, and CS were present at higher seagrass biomasses per unit area. Sediment grain
size was significantly larger in the CS beds. The sediments of the TH beds displayed
the higher sorting coefficient, as well as the highest silt/clay and organic content.
Furthermore, the TH beds were characterized by the highest macrofauna abundance
(12,304 individual m-2) and richness (17 taxa). The macrofaunal communities were significantly different between the beds of the five different seagrass species. The TH beds
were dominant solely by malacostracans, but polychaetes and malacostracans were
co-dominant in the beds of other species. While polychaete abundance was higher in
the CR beds, ophiuroids, malacostracans, and ostracods were more abundant in the TH
beds. Positive correlations were detected between amphipod abundance and sediment
organic content and between gastropod abundance and seagrass biomass, indicating
that the macrofaunal communities were primarily influenced by food resources, but not
physical structure.


ECOPHYSIOLOGY OF A CORAL SPECIES IN THE NORTHERNMOST ATLANTIC
REEF SYSTEM: EFFECTS OF LOW TEMPERATURES ON SIDERASTREA RADIANS IN BERMUDA (Abstract ID: 28731 | Poster ID: 320)


Thermal stress induced by low seawater temperatures is a primary factor restricting
coral growth and distribution. High latitude reefs may support coral populations that are
resilient to thermal stress since they are exposed to wide annual temperature ranges. In
Bermuda, the northernmost Atlantic reef system, corals are subjected to average temperatures below 18°C in the winter. The physiological responses of the zooxanthellate
coral speciesSiderastrea radians to low temperatures were assessed by two experiments.
Firstly, replicate colonies were subjected to reductions in temperature of 2°C every
two days from ambient (25°C) to an extreme low of 15°C and back to ambient. Gross
productivity was significantly depressed only at 17 and 15°C with rates recovering to
initial values once temperatures returned to ambient. The photochemical efficiency of
25°C, 21°C and 17°C for two weeks. The exposure to 17°C caused significant decreases
in photochemical efficiency and in the chlorophyll a concentration with no signs of
recovery over the experiment; however, net calcification rates did not vary among treatments. Overall, even though low temperatures disrupted photosynthetic activities of the
extreme low temperatures. This research gives insight into thermal resilience of tropical
corals at high latitudes.

A PHYLOGENOMIC APPROACH REVEALS THE MONOPHYLY OF SCLERACTINIANS (Abstract ID: 28970)
Calcification is one of the most distinct traits of scleractinian corals. Their hard skeletons
constitute the substratum of the iconic reef ecosystems and confers corals their remarkable diversity of shapes. The evolutionary relationship between scleractinians and the
closely related non-calcifying coralimorpharians is key to understand how calcification
emerged and evolved in corals. The crucial question is whether scleractinians form
a monophyletic group or, alternatively, if coralimorpharians are nested within corals
and have lost their ability to calcify (the so-called “naked-coral” hypothesis). However,
despite major efforts based on comparison of morphological traits and molecular
markers, the relationship between scleractinians and corallimorpharians has remained
unresolved and controversial. Extensive phylogenetic analyses based on a large number
of full mitochondrial genomes were not able to unambiguously resolve their evolutionary relationship. This difficulty is partly attributable to the considerable heterogeneity in
composition and evolutionary rates of the mitochondrial sequences in the different scleractinian and corallimorpharian clades. Here a new analysis is presented based on 291
single copy nuclear protein-coding genes from 15 anthozoan taxa. Unlike the mitochondrial sequences that suggested the “naked coral” hypothesis, these nuclear markers do
not display any distinct compositional bias in their nucleotide or amino-acid sequences.
Several phylogenomic approaches congruently reveal a topology consistent with scleractinian monophyly and corallimorpharians as the sister clade of scleractinians.

199

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

of multiple stressors and the interaction between warming and local stressors such as
fishing or recreational diving. The results point out the importance of bearing in mind the
synergistic effects of stressors acting at multiple scales when designing and implementing conservation actions at local scale. Finally, we demonstrate how combining all these
approaches can help to better foresee the potential effects of global change in reef
organisms.


ANALYSES OF CORALLIMORPHARIAN TRANSCRIPTOMES PROVIDES NEW
PERSPECTIVES ON THE EVOLUTION OF CALCIFICATION IN THE SCLERACTINIA (CORALS) (Abstract ID: 28129)
Corallimorpharians have a close phylogenetic relationship with corals and can
potentially provide novel perspectives on the evolution of biomineralization within the
Hexacorallia. Surveying transcriptomes of corallimorphs led to the identification of
orthologs of some skeletal organic matrix proteins that were previously considered to be
restricted to corals; this is significant given that surprisingly few of the proteins identified
in the skeletal proteome are coral-specific. Whilst carbonic anhydrases are ubiquitous
proteins involved in CO2 trafficking, both calcification and photo-symbiosis are assumed
to place increased demands on the CA repertoire. These have presumably driven the
elaboration of complex CA repertoires that are typical of corals. Comparison of corallimorph CAs with those of corals indicates that corals have specifically expanded the
secreted and membrane-associated type CAs, whereas similar complexity is observed
in the two groups with respect to other CA types. Similar numbers and type distribution
of CAs between the symbiotic and non-symbiotic corallimorphs suggests that, whereas
an expansion of the CA repertoire has been necessary to enable calcification, it may not
be a requirement to enable symbiosis. Consistent with this idea, preliminary analysis suggests that the CA complexity of symbiotic and non-symbiotic sea anemones is similar.
This study is consistent with the idea that coral calcification evolution required relatively
few new genes, that are largely involved in the deposition process, but also the expansion


PALAU’S NORTHERN REEFS: SCIENCE AND MONITORING USED TO GUIDE
THE MANAGEMENT AND ASSESS THE RECOVERY OF CORAL REEF FISH
STOCKS (Abstract ID: 29390)
As fishing pressure has lead to declines in coral reef fish stocks, it has become evident
that new management approaches are needed to ensure the sustainability of these
fisheries. We present a case study from the northern reefs of Palau, where two states
have decided to co-manage their fishery resources to safeguard their livelihoods, food
security and fishing culture. Previous analysis of the main fishery targeted species
showed that spawning potential ratios (SPRs) were below the threshold that allows
stocks to recover. Here we describe the science and recommendations used to put the
stocks back on a path of recovery, and present the monitoring protocols used to assess
the effectiveness of these strategies. For baseline monitoring we used fishery-dependent
and -independent data collection techniques, including dive and fish landing surveys,
where we applied stereo-video technology to accurately and efficiently survey exploited
fish stocks. We report on size frequencies and biomass from dive surveys covering 65 km
of transects across different depths, habitats and protected area status. Our baseline data
reveal that stocks in frequently fished areas exhibit truncated size frequency distributions
and reduced biomass compared to stocks in effectively enforced MPAs. We also compare the diving survey data to the local estimates of size at maturity, size frequencies and
species composition extracted from catch data collected by local fishers. This case study
documents an achievable approach to coral reef fisheries assessment and monitoring
that can be applied to other regions.


SYMBIODINIUM KAWAGUTII GENOME ILLUMINATES DINOFLAGELLATE
GENE EXPRESSION AND CORAL SYMBIOSIS (Abstract ID: 29385)
The lack of a good understanding on establishment and regulation of coral-Symbiodinium symbiosis at the genomic level has hampered efforts to understand and manage
coral bleaching and degradation. By high-throughput sequencing we (an international
team) analyzed the 1180-Mb genome and RNA of Symbiodinium kawagutii. The genome
has been subjected to active (retro)transposition and gene family expansion, especially
in processes important for successful symbiosis with corals. We found an altered glycan
pathway that specifies (GlcNAc)5(Man)5(Asn)1 glycan rich in free mannose branches
and terminal mannose-mannose units available for lectin binding in host recognition.
Numerous genes related to legume-root nodule symbiosis and parasite virulence identified may be related to the initiation of the symbiosis. A high number of transporters were
catalogued potentially facilitating material exchanges between the Symbiodinium and a
symbiotic coral like Acroporal digitifera. We also documented genes potentially governing
sexual reproduction and cyst formation, indicating that the symbiotic lineage maintains
a typical dinoflagellate life cycle. Most strikingly, we identified an extensive microRNA
system that appears to regulate genes expression not only in Symbiodinium but also in a
host coral. Further comparative genomics analyses suggest that the type of photosynthate
supplied by the symbiotic alga and nutrients by the coral host can vary among symbiosis
systems, implying that biochemical complementarity may be key to host-symbiont selection and robustness of the symbiosis system in face of environmental stress.


FOLLOWING PROTEOMIC CHANGES IN SYMBIOTIC AIPTASIA CYTOSOL AND
SYMBIOSOME MEMBRANES DURING THERMAL STRESS (Abstract ID: 29550)
We are investigating the pathways involved in thermal-induced bleaching in cnidariandinoflagellate symbiosis by analyzing in parallel changes in mRNA and protein abundance. Symbiotic Aiptasia anemones hosting the clonalSymbiodinium strain SSB01 were
subjected to thermal stress at 34C and sampled at 0, 24, and 48 h to reflect pre-stress,
onset of bleaching, and approx. 50% bleaching, respectively. Anemone homogenates
were separated into host and algal fractions. Host fractions were further separated
into cytosolic (CF) and membrane-enriched fractions (MF). CF and MF were labeled
with isobaric tags and subjected to LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry. Data analysis is
in progress. In addition, to allow a more detailed analysis of a particularly interesting
protein set, we are preparing a symbiosome-membrane sample using antibodies to guide
fractionation. We confirmed that the PC3 monoclonal antibody (Wakefield and Kempf,
tissues and in host homogenates but not in axenic algal cultures. We also generated a
peptide-directed antibody against the glucose transporter Glut8, validated its specificity
by Western blots and peptide competition, and showed staining of the symbiosome
membrane by immunofluorescence. By sucrose-density-gradient centrifugation, we
isolated a fraction that stained strongly with both PC3 and anti-Glut8 antibodies. Further
characterization of this fraction (to identify possible contaminating membrane elements)


MULTIPLE STRESSORS ON TEMPERATE CORALS: INSIGHTS FROM EXPERIMENTAL, OBSERVATIONAL AND MODELLING STUDIES (Abstract ID: 29773)
Local and global disturbances are increasingly affecting marine biota and are of major
concern for the management of marine ecosystems worldwide. Understanding how
these stressors interact and the resulting cumulative impacts is critical to improve our
predictions of the evolution of marine ecosystems in changing oceans. While multiple
stressors’ interactions in corals have been mostly assessed in laboratory, the combination of different approaches such as laboratory, observational and modelling studies is
essential to better understand and predict the response of these organisms. Our research
focuses on the effects of global and local stressors and their interaction on different
temperate corals: the coral Cladocora caespitosa and the octocorals Paramuricea clavata
and Corallium rubrum. We will show different results from: (1) laboratory experiments
studying the interaction between global stressors such as warming and invasive species,
(2) field studies of warming and acidification effects and their potential interaction from
observations at CO2 vents and other non-acidified sites, and (3) modelling the effects


ADVANCING ECOSYSTEM-BASED MANAGEMENT: ECOSYSTEM-BASED FISHERIES MANAGEMENT POLICY AND ROADMAP, WITH PARTICULAR EMPHASIS
FOR CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28073)
NOAA has adopted ecosystem-based management (EBM) as the approach for meeting
the agency’s mandates to sustainably manage the nation’s marine resources. Ecosystembased management is an integrated approach that incorporates the entire ecosystem,
including humans, into resource management decisions across all ocean-use sectors.
EBM accounts for a changing marine climate and is guided by an adaptive management

200

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

approach. EBM is informed by science to ensure resilience in marine ecosystems and in
the goods and services they provide. NOAA Fisheries is advancing EBM for the fisheries
sector through development of an Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management (EBFM)
Policy Statement and associated Roadmap. This presentation will provide an overview
and update of the draft EBFM Policy Statement and Roadmap, how they relate to other
emphasize the unique and important facets about coral reefs that make them especially



NOAA CORAL REEF WATCH’S PROBABILISTIC SEASONAL-SCALE CORAL
BLEACHING THERMAL STRESS OUTLOOK SYSTEM FOR INFORMING MANAGEMENT DECISIONS (Abstract ID: 28196 | Poster ID: 534)

DIEL PATTERNS OF CELLULAR OXYGEN CONCENTRATIONS AND AEROBIC
AND ANAEROBIC ENERGY PRODUCTION IN CORALS (Abstract ID: 28899 |
Poster ID: 21)

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Coral Reef Watch
(CRW) and National Centers for Environment Prediction (NCEP) recently released
version 3.0 of the global Coral Bleaching Thermal Stress Outlook system, based on
sea surface temperature (SST) predictions from NCEP’s operational Climate Forecast
System Version 2 (CFSv2). Every week, the Outlook system predicts the probability of
thermal stress capable of causing mass coral bleaching for several months in advance
(current online products are ordinarily released out to four months), using 28 ensemble
members derived from the CFSv2 SST forecast runs over the previous week. CRW uses
a recently developed skill analysis tool to investigate regionally- and lead-time-dependent skill levels of the Outlook. The v3 Outlook system and associated skill analysis will
be presented. An even newer version of CRW’s Outlook is currently under development
to incorporate additional, short-range SST forecasts from the CFSv2 to increase Outlook
