skill during the first three months of lead-time. CRW’s Coral Bleaching Outlook system is
critical to its global decision support system for coral bleaching management and helps
managers and other stakeholders prepare for and respond to environmental stresses to
coral reefs.

Corals experience hyperoxia during the day due to Symbiodinium photosynthesis and
hypoxia at night due to respiration by the coral holobiont. Previous studies have revealed
corals undergo daily oscillations in the expression of putative metabolic genes. However,
the anaerobic energy production pathways in corals are unknown. To study the link
between nighttime hypoxia in coral tissues and cellular energy production, the branching scleractinian species Acropora yongei was studied in a laboratory setting. Oxygen
concentrations were measured in the diffusive boundary layer using microelectrodes,
demonstrating daily hyperoxia and nightly hypoxia. Branches were sampled every 4
hours over a diurnal cycle to measure metabolic enzyme activity, metabolites, and protein expression by 2D gels. For the first time, it was shown that corals produce strombine,
an end metabolite of anaerobic glycolysis. High amounts of strombine were present
in coral tissues during the day as well as at night. Enzyme activity assays revealed that
aerobic energy producing pathways were significantly less active during the night versus
the day. Thus, the relative contribution of anaerobic glycolysis was greater at nighttime,
corroborating the concept of nightly functional anaerobiosis in corals. However, protein
expression of detectable glycolytic and TCA cycle enzymes did not exhibit diel patterns.
Therefore, the transition from aerobic metabolism during the day to anaerobic metabolism at night appears to be controlled on the substrate level and by posttranslational
modifications to metabolic enzymes.



EFFECTS OF OCEAN WARMING AND ACIDIFICATION ON THE SEAGRASS
THALASSIA HEMPRICHII FROM CORAL REEFS OF KENTING, TAIWAN (Abstract
ID: 28666)

PHAGE-BACTERIA INTERACTIONS IN CORAL REEF BENTHIC COMPETITION
(Abstract ID: 28919)

Seagrass beds provide important carbon sinks in coastal ecosystems, and it is thought
that increasing the quantity of natural carbon sinks could help to slow the rate of global
climate change (GCC). Therefore, understanding the natural carbon sinks on seagrass
beds, as well as how these high-productivity marine ecosystems are influenced by climate change factors, are critical issues. A mesocosm-based approach was taken herein
in which the seagrass Thalassia hemprichii and reef corals of Kenting, Taiwan, as well as
additional ecological functional groups, were cultured under either control or elevated
temperature and/or ocean acidification (OA)-simulating conditions. After 12 weeks, OA
(800 ppm) was found to increase seagrass productivity, below-ground biomass, rhizome
carbon content, and carbon sequestration. Rising temperature (25 to 31ºC) increased the
maximum quantum yield (Fv/Fm), productivity, relative dry weight, carbon sequestration, growth rate, and decomposition rate, but reduced shoot density and the carbon
rate of dry weight increase, Fv/Fm, growth rate, below-ground biomass, shoot carbon
and 31ºC warming displayed the highest leaf production, below-ground production, and
GCC by absorbing and storing more carbon in the shoots and surrounding sediments.

Bacterial communities mediate coral reef ecosystem transitions from coral- to algaldominated communities through shifts in metabolisms at the interaction zones. Anthropogenic disturbances such as overfishing and nutrient loading stimulate algal growth,
aiding turf and macroalgae to outcompete stony, reef building corals. Here we present
data using bacterial and viral metagenomes from benthic competitive interaction zones
in the Southern Line Islands, a pristine reef system that offers a unique model to assess
baselines. We sequenced 200 samples from 15 different types of interactions including
corals of the genera Porites, Acropora, and Montipora, and algal functional groups
such as Halimeda, filamentous red algae, turf algae, and crustose coralline algae. Our
approach allows for a robust understanding of how viral and bacterial communities may
mediate physiologic events that lead to phase shifts. This is the most comprehensive
and detailed metagenomic dataset on coral reef benthic interactions available to date.
We found that coral-associated bacteriophage communities exhibit a higher prevalence
of mucus binding properties, indicating that corals utilize phage-mediated immunity
against invasive bacterial pathogens. In addition, the algal-associated communities
exhibited higher levels of lysogeny, a feature that may facilitate algal microbes to invade
coral holobionts by containing more temperate phage communities and thus expressing
phage-encoded genes that offer competitive advantages such as virulence factors.



FOSTERING SOLUTIONARIES AND OCEANPRENEURS IN OCEAN YOUTH’S
CORAL WORKSHOP (Abstract ID: 29899)
Ocean Youth is a capacity building program for tomorrow’s leaders and change-makers
to conserve our oceans. The program is for 13-25 year olds and consists of remote
interaction via a digital platform and face-to-face interaction with workshops and special
events hosted by SEA LIFE aquariums around Australia. There are 3 phases in the online
program starting with an introduction to “Ocean Care” issues (and potential solutions)
including climate change, pollution and overfishing. The second phase, “Changemakers

201

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

in Action” is about getting inspired by amazing people making a positive difference for
oceans by influencing change in their community and beyond. The third phase, “Solutionaries and Oceanpreneurs Unleashed”, is about building the skills and confidence
to create and implement solutions to protect and conserve oceans. Ocean Youth’s
Coral Workshop gives participants the chance to experience the fascinating world of
reef-building corals. There are hands-on opportunities to learn about coral identification,
discover coral fluorescence and go on a virtual dive. They are inspired through interviews with scientists talking about what can be done to reverse anthropogenic impacts
on coral reefs. Future opportunities will exist for these participants to get involved in reef
restoration and citizen science projects. Ocean Youth Ambassadors are currently being
fostered through face-to-face interactions in Sydney, Melbourne & Mooloolaba while the
online platform allows for global participation and the world is their oyster.

A TEN YEAR TEMPERATURE RECORD FROM A SHALLOW WATER REEF IN THE
MESOAMERICAN BARRIER REEF LAGOON (Abstract ID: 29875 | Poster ID: 362)
The Mesoamerican barrier reef system in the western Caribbean creates a large region
of lagoon coral reef habitat. As the largest lagoon habitat within the Caribbean, this
region experiences differing oceanographic and temperature conditions as compared to
offshore areas. The occurrence of several endemic species within the area also supports
this area as a unique biogeographic region. This study presents an underwater temperature record over a ten year period (2004-2014) collected from Wee Wee Caye within
the South Water Caye Marine Reserve of Belize. These data will be put into context by
comparison to other Caribbean data sets.

STRENGTHENING CITIZEN SCIENCE NETWORKS TO BENEFIT THE GREAT
BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 29231 | Poster ID: 725)
Citizen science is gaining recognition as a means for public collection of valuable information which can improve reef management outcomes. Benefits include increased data
to supplement scientific research programs; community engagement and capacity building; and cost-effective and innovative program structures. Yet, citizen science programs
often face significant challenges to deliver sustainable and best-practice programs. Some
of the common difficulties include insufficient funding, limited staff capacity, insufficient
awareness of the program by data users, and/or perceptions of the low credibility of
citizen science data. In 2012, a scoping study consulted a range of stakeholders to identify critical needs and opportunities for a more coordinated approach to citizen science
across the Great Barrier Reef (GBR). The Great Barrier Reef Citizen Science Alliance
(Alliance) network evolved as a response to this study. The Alliance mission is to foster
collaboration, capacity building, advancement and action for citizen science that benefits
the Great Barrier Reef. The program is hosted by the Great Barrier Reef Foundation,
with support from corporate partner Boeing. Ten member groups from coastal and
marine citizen science programs are actively engaged in this initiative. This presentation
will share the past successes, strategies and future plans of the Alliance. It will showcase
the benefits of a strategic and collaborative approach to strengthen opportunities for
citizen science providers, researchers, Reef managers and the Australian community to
tackle key Reef issues.

JOHNSTON ATOLL: REEF FISH HYBRID ZONE BETWEEN HAWAII AND THE
Johnston Atoll is isolated in the Central Pacific Ocean (16°45′ N 169°31′ W). The
nearest landfall is French Frigate Shoals , 804 km (500 miles) north in the northwest
Hawaiian Islands . It is about 1,287 km (800 miles) southwest of Honolulu, Hawaii. The
Line Islands of Kiribati are about 1,440 km (900 miles) south and the Marshall Islands
are about 2,560 km (1,600 miles) to the southwest. The labrid species, Thalassoma lutescens has wide range distribution from the Indo-Pacific throughout the Line Islands. The
related species, Thalassoma dupperryi, is endemic to the Hawaiian Islands. The larvae
of both species make it to Johnston Atoll where we have found a mix of phenotypes
representing a range of hybridization events. The hybrids are easily distinguished by
coloration. The large number of hybrid individuals and the diversity of their coloration
suggest that the hybrid population is also locally sustaining. We also observed the arrival
of two damselfish species to the atoll and their subsequent hybridization: Abudefduf
adominalis and vaigiensis. This paper is based upon scientific diver observations of fish
species at Johnston Atoll during the period of 1983 to 2003. The pattern and abundance
of the hybrid wrasse will be described. We will also add notes on species that have been
seen only on rare occasions and thus suggest infrequent long-range dispersal.



A PASSIVE ACOUSTIC SURVEY OF FISH SOUND PRODUCTION AT RILEY’S
HUMP WITHIN TORTUGAS SOUTH ECOLOGICAL RESERVE: IMPLICATIONS
REGARDING SPAWNING AND HABITAT USE (Abstract ID: 27959)

MAKING WAVES: REEF CITIZEN SCIENCE FOR IMPACT (Abstract ID: 29396)

Passive acoustic recorders were used to monitor sound production indicative of the use
of spawning habitat by groupers (Serranidae) at Riley’s Hump, which is located in the
Tortugas South Ecological Reserve (TSER), part of the Florida Keys National Marine
Sanctuary. Sound production by black grouper (Mycteroperca bonaci), red grouper
of day but occurred more often in the evening during the winter-spring spawning period
than during other times of day and year. This pattern for these species is consistent with
results of previous studies that documented the association of sound production with
reproductive behavior at spawning sites. Distinct diel and seasonal patterns of sound
production by the longspine squirrelfish (Holocentrus rufus) and bicolor damselfish
(Stegastes partitus) also were recorded. Riley’s Hump is a documented spawning site for
mutton snapper (Lutjanus analis), and recordings of black grouper, red grouper, and red
hind indicate that it is used for reproductive purposes by these species as well. These
results demonstrate the importance of the TSER and the need for continued research to
understand its effect on the recovery and sustainability of managed fish populations.

Engaging volunteers in marine citizen science projects has intrinsic value in regards to
community capacity building and education. Yet the process of developing strategic
citizen science projects and translating data into valued results with natural resource
management applications can be challenging. Since 2001, Reef Check Australia has
facilitated hands-on marine citizen science research and education projects. Four case
studies showcase lessons learned from programs designed to create valuable social and
environmental outcomes through engagement of volunteers. 1)Identifying and responding to data gaps through volunteer reef monitoring of subtropical reefs in South East
Queensland. 2)Demonstrating citizen science data quality through a precision study on
volunteer data and analysis of 14 years of globally standardised Reef Check reef health
data in Queensland. 3)Adapting citizen science protocols to expand project opportunities that enhance capacity building, partnerships and strategic natural resource management applications through reef habitat mapping. 4)Tailoring new pathways for sharing
citizen science findings and engaging volunteers with the community via a Reef Check
Ambassadors community outreach program. Through these case studies, we share our
approach, lessons learned and successes. This offers insights into potential approaches
202

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

and exposed to one of three treatments for a period of 16 weeks: i) caged to exclude
herbivores, ii) exposed to herbivores, iii) exposed to herbivores then caged after 8 weeks.
Parrotfishes were responsible for the removal of holdfasts and limited the potential for
regrowth. The window of opportunity hypothesis for the recovery of coral populations
would therefore only be possible when co-occurring with increased herbivory.

for developing targeted and flexible citizen science projects and showcasing the work
of volunteers and project stakeholders, and collaborating with partners for beneficial
research, management and education applications.


MANELL-GEUS: A MODEL FOR FOSTERING MULTI-AGENCY COLLABORATION
(Abstract ID: 28432)

GLOBAL PROJECTIONS OF CORAL BLEACHING UNDER WARMING AND
OCEAN ACIDIFICATION USING A MECHANISTIC MODELLING APPROACH
(Abstract ID: 29909)

Guam’s Manell-Geus watershed contains extensive coral reefs and sea grass beds.
These habitats support a strong fishing tradition and important cultural connections, but
they are impaired by poor water quality associated with sedimentation and stormwater
management issues. NOAA’s Coral Reef Conservation Program and Guam’s local coral
managers identified Manell-Geus as one of two priority sites in 2010, while NOAA
Fisheries named the site a Habitat Blueprint Focus Area in 2013. These two designations have catalyzed new partnerships for increased conservation work in the watershed,
including in-kind as well as funding support from a range of local, state, federal and
non-government organizations. With coordination and technical assistance from NOAA’s
Coral Program, partners are currently working on a range of forest restoration, habitat
mapping, water quality, and other efforts to address threats to the watershed and its
adjacent coral reefs. Private and community partners also participate by volunteering,
providing access to private lands, and learning new skills to actively conserve these areas. NOAA’s commitment to fostering partnerships for this site is increasing conservation
efforts both in Manell-Geus and around the island.

Global climate models project increased rates of mass coral bleaching such that many of
the world’s reefs will disappear by mid-century. Typically, models use a Degree Heating
Week (DHW) – based bleaching threshold in combination with sea surface temperature (SST) output from global climate models. While these approaches are empirically
justifiable, they are nonspecific in applying a generic bleaching threshold to all coral
species and typically do not incorporate the potential for corals to adaptively respond to
an increasingly warmer, more acidic ocean. We scaled up a mechanistic model of coral
and symbiont ecological dynamics and symbiont evolutionary dynamics to the global
scale, and estimate severe bleaching events based on declines in coral cover. The model
was run for changes in SST and water chemistry predicted by the NOAA/GFDL Earth
System Model 2 through 2100. We normalized the model to achieve a reasonable global
severe bleaching frequency (~10%) between 1985-2010 based on ReefBase bleaching
observations. Coral bleaching responses to rising SSTs are tested using susceptible versus tolerant coral types, with and without variation in symbiont thermal tolerance, and
in combination with ocean acidification. Projected bleaching frequencies are also compared and contrasted regionally to results from previous DHW–based threshold models.
A global mechanistic model provides a valuable tool for assessing the potential effects of
genetic or community-level variation in symbiont thermal tolerance on projected rates
of mass coral bleaching.


PROFESSIONAL SCUBA DIVERS ABOVE THE WATERLINE: USING EXPERT ASSESSMENT TO INFORM CORAL REEF MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 29585)


Scientists and natural resource managers have increasingly recruited SCUBA divers to
collect data that will improve our understanding about the status of marine resources
and environments. Increased reliance on this group has enabled researchers to expand
data collection efforts, while minimizing research costs. In most cases, diver-collected
data has been limited to observations recorded by divers while underwater. The present
research, however, explores the possibility of employing above-water PGIS methods to
collect spatial data that can be used to assess the ecological status of coral reefs. Using
PGIS data provided by occupational SCUBA divers in the USVI, the authors propose
that local ecological knowledge can be used to provide an expert assessment of the
relative quality and threat levels of area coral reefs, as well as understand which reefs
are most used. With this information, resource managers can more effectively control
management investments and actions to benefit the end-users as well as the coral reef
resources. By looking at the co-occurrence of reef quality characteristics and stress
levels in coral reef areas used by people, resource managers can better decide whether
to monitor reef quality, work to mitigate or reduce threats, initiate restoration activities,
or simply divert management effort to other areas. In ideal cases, expert assessment can
serve as a supplement to biophysical data collected through regular coral reef monitoring. Where rich biophysical data does not exist, expert assessment may be a substitute.

INITIAL OUTPLANT PERFORMANCE OF ACROPORA CERVICORNISACROSS
THREE REEF ZONES IN THE CAYMAN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 28354 | Poster ID:
489)
To date, tens of thousands of nursery-reared staghorn coral Acropora cervicornis colonies
have been outplanted to restore degraded reefs, largely as a result of increased capacity
for coral aquaculture. The fate of outplanted colonies, however, is highly variable and seldom documented. In Little Cayman, Cayman Islands, remnant populations of staghorn
coral remain in each of the reef zones where it was historically abundant. These include
reef zone, a total of sixty ~20-cm colonies were outplanted to two plots each within the
three zones of interest. Survivorship after 85 days differed significantly between zones,
with mortality at deep plots exceeding that of shallow and intermediate plots. Net total
linear extension of surviving colonies was significantly higher at deep and intermediate
sites compared to shallow sites, which experienced a high rate of natural breakage due
to wave action. Following the conclusion of the study, colonies at shallow plots experienced 90% mortality during an anomalous thermal event. Ultimately this study indicates
that intermediate spur-and-groove sites in Little Cayman are most advantageous for outplanting activities using existing restoration methods. New strategies must be developed


THE HOLDFAST IS KEY: SARGASSUM REGROWTH FROM HOLDFASTS RAPID
UNLESS REMOVED BY HERBIVORES (Abstract ID: 28942)


Macroalgae, especially large, canopy-forming species, are generally seen as a sign of
reef degradation. Macroalgal-dominated states are difficult to reverse, as macroalgae
pre-empt space on the benthos and shade and abrade coral colonies. However, it has
recently been hypothesised that storms/cyclones may provide a window of opportunity
for the recovery of coral populations by removing the algal biomass. We conducted an
experiment demonstrating the resilience of Sargassum to cyclone impacts by creating
1.5x1.5m ‘plots’ in which we either cut the Sargassum at the stipe, leaving the holdfast
(simulated cyclone effect), removed the holdfasts completely or removed nothing
(control). The regrowth of the Sargassum with intact holdfasts was indistinguishable from
control plots, demonstrating that Sargassum is capable of rapid regrowth from holdfasts
after storm/cyclone damage. Further, we examined if herbivores are capable of damaging these holdfasts, preventing regrowth. Pieces of coral rubble with attached Sargassum
were moved to areas of high herbivory, the number and size of holdfasts quantified,

VARIATION IN GROWTH, BRANCHING, AND BLEACHING AMONG NURSERYREARED STAGHORN CORAL ACROPORA CERVICORNISGENOTYPES (Abstract ID:
28398)
Over the last decade, genetic factors associated with Caribbean Acroporarestoration
have received increased attention. However, quantified differences among genotypes are
to quantify and document phenotypic variability among ten genotypes while they were
being grown for population enhancement. Twelve non-branching, 5-cm apical fragments
were taken from nursery-reared colonies of each genotype. These fragments were
randomly distributed across four identical PVC tree structures for grow-out. At the start
of the experiment and on ~45-day intervals, total linear extension (TLE) and branches

203

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

were quantified for each colony. Buoyant weight was measured for each colony on days
had visually recovered by day 291. Significant differences in bleaching incidence, TLE,
calcification rate, and branching were detected among genotypes. Unexpected variation
in post-hoc ranking between TLE and calcification was observed, suggesting genotypebased differences in growth strategy. This information could guide propagation and
restoration using the ten study genotypes. In addition, this study may represent a model
enhancement.

A COMPREHENSIVE INVESTIGATION OF MESOPHOTIC CORAL ECOSYSTEMS
IN THE HAWAIIAN ARCHIPELAGO (Abstract ID: 29928)

ASSESSMENT OF CORAL REEF FISH BIODIVERSITY: HOW TO CHOOSE THE
RIGHT INDICES (Abstract ID: 28096)

During an interdisciplinary effort spanning more than two decades, we characterized the
most expansive MCEs ever recorded, with vast macroalgal communities and areas of
100% coral-cover between depths of 50-90 m extending for tens of km^2 in the Hawaiian Archipelago. We used a variety of sensors and data gathering techniques to establish
geophysical, biodiversity patterns, population dynamics, and trophic dynamics of algae,
corals, fishes and invertebrates in reef-associated habitats down to 150 m. MCEs are
associated with clear water and suitable substrate. In comparison to shallow reefs in the
Hawaiian Archipelago, inhabitants of MCEs have lower total diversity, harbor new and
unique species, and have higher rates of endemism in fishes. Fish species present in shallow and MCE depths have similar population and trophic (except benthic invertivores)
structures and high genetic connectivity with lower fecundity at MCE depths. MCEs in
Hawai’i are widespread but associated with particular geophysical characteristics. High
genetic, ecological and trophic connectivity establish the potential for MCEs to serve
as refugia for some species, but our results question the premise that MCEs are more
resilient than shallow reefs. We found that endemism within MCEs increases with depth,
and our results do not support suggestions of a global faunal break at 60 m. Our findings
enhance the scientific foundations for conservation and management of MCEs, and
provide a template for future interdisciplinary research on MCEs worldwide.

Quantifying the biodiversity based on diversity indices is essential both for the development of effective management policies - to mitigate the loss of coral fish diversity
- and to study ecological processes. We present the first representative and quantified
overview of the indices used worldwide for assessing the biodiversity of coral reef fishes
(from 1990 up to the present). Our aim is to assess to what extent and on the basis of
which criteria the complexity of biodiversity is taken into account in coral fish studies.
We found that the multicomponent aspect of biodiversity, which is considered as a key
feature of biodiversity for numerous terrestrial and marine ecosystems, has been poorly
taken into account in coral reef fish studies. Species richness is still strongly dominant
while other diversity components, such as functional diversity, are underestimated even
when functional information is available. We also demonstrate that the reason for choosing particular indices is often unclear, mainly based on empirical rationales and/or the
reproduction of widespread habits, but generally with no clear relevance with regard to
the aims of the studies. Finally, we propose general guidelines to serve as a basis for the
selection of indices that provide complementary and relevant information for monitoring the response of coral reef fish biodiversity in the face of structuring factors (natural
or anthropic). The aim of these guidelines was to achieve a better match between the
properties of the selected indices and the context of each study.



LATITUDINAL PATTERNS OF REEF FISH FEEDING ON THE BENTHOS IN
CHANGING ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 28712)

ORGANIC MATTER BIOAVAILABILITY IN THE GREAT BARRIER REEF LAGOON
(Abstract ID: 28290 | Poster ID: 91)

Reef fish feeding on the benthos strongly affect ecosystem functioning on coral reefs
worldwide. Fish species and feeding intensity can vary with several factors including
temperature, depth, human-related impacts and biogeographic history. Large-scale
latitudinal comparisons across natural gradients can enhance our understanding of
these interactions in changing ecosystems. We addressed latitudinal variation of reef fish
feeding on the benthos in terms of intensity, functional and taxonomic composition in
16 locations comprising different biogeographic provinces between latitudes 34°N and
27°S in the Western Atlantic. Feeding pressure on the benthos per unit of time and area
was determined using video recordings where we could determine both biomass and
bite rates of individual fishes. Feeding intensity was higher in the tropical region and decreased towards extratropical regions in both hemispheres. There was a consistent shift
in the predominance of feeding pressure by herbivorous functional groups in the tropics
to omnivorous groups in extratropical regions. Composition of feeding pressure by functional group was more similar within regions of similar temperature than biogeography,
whereas in terms of species there was a clear biogeographic footprint. Species identity
and their relative contribution within functional groups differed between biogeographic
provinces. These results can be used to create predictive models of the impact of global
changes in reef fish feeding, accounting for potential species range expansions and their
impact on the ecosystem.

Organic matter (OM) in coral reef ecosystems has been suggested to be a major source
of energy and nutrients. However, while the importance of OM cycling for the overall
biogeochemical activity has been proposed there are no studies investigating in detail the
degradation of OM in reef systems. Therefore, in this study the degradation of particulate (POM) and dissolved organic matter (DOM) was followed over a 50 days period at
three locations in the Great Barrier Reef lagoon, during the dry and wet seasons, in dark,
temperature controlled, laboratory incubations. Our results demonstrate that the POM
fraction was more bioavailable and degraded at a faster rate than the DOM compounds.
The data also shows the organic matter, on average, contained more than 90% of the
total bioavailable nutrients, suggesting the organic matter fraction is an important and
unaccounted source, in sustaining the productivity of this coral reef system.

A SUSPECTED NEW TROPICAL MARINE SPECIES OF AMPHIDINIUM (DINOPHYCEAE)FROM SANYA, CHINA (Abstract ID: 30170 | Poster ID: 369)
A dinoflagellate isolated from Sanya bay in China, with a minute and left-deﬂected
epicone, was identified as a suspected new species of Amphidinium sensu stricto based
on morphological and ultrastructural characters combination with LSU rDNA phylogeny.
The main diacritic features distinguishing Amphidinium sp. from related taxa were: shape,
size, position of distal and proximal cingulum ends, site of longitudinal flagellar insertion,
sulcal course, chloroplast characteristics, and mode of cell division. In the present study,
genetic phylogenetic analyses based on partial LSU rDNA using Neighbor-Joining and
Maximum Likelihood revealed that Amphidinium sp. was in the monophyletic clade of
Amphidinium sensu stricto, meanwhile the morphology of 16 species of Amphidinium
sensu stricto were compared with the suspected new species, especially morphologically


ENVIRONMENTALLY RELEVANT CONCENTRATIONS OF MICROPLASTIC PARTICLES INFLUENCE REEF FISH ECOLOGY (Abstract ID: 28053)
The widespread occurrence and accumulation of plastic waste in the environment has
become a growing global concern over the past decade. While some marine organisms
have been shown to ingest plastic few studies have investigated the ecological effects
of plastic waste on animals. Here we show that exposure to environmentally relevant
concentrations of microplastic polystyrene particles (200-300 μm) inhibits hatching,
decreases growth rates and alters feeding preferences and innate behaviors of the spiny
Chromis (Acanthochromis polyacanthus) larvae. Furthermore, individuals exposed to

204

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

photosynthesis was never saturated and barely exceeded the compensation irradiance. By contrast, horizontal high-irradiated surfaces that were under photosynthesis
saturation during most daytime showed the highest saturation values (Ek) and the lowest
absorptance. This enabled holobionts to reduce the absorption of excess light energy,
and hence the metabolic costs of photoprotection and repair of Symbiodinium. We
concluded that coral surface inclination determines significant intracolony changes in the
holobiont physiological condition to enhance the energetic balance of massive species.
This plasticity may be a key to explain the intracolony variation in dominant symbionts,
as well as the different physiological responses to thermal-stress or other environmental
factors in coral colonies.

microplastics do not respond to olfactory threat cues which greatly increases predatorinduced mortality rates. Our results demonstrate that microplastic particles operate both
chemically and physically on larval reef fish performance and development, which is
known to have severe effects on recruitment dynamics in coral reef ecosystems.


DISTRIBUTION OF THREATENED CORAL SPECIES IN THE PARQUE NACIONAL
SISTEMA ARRECIFAL VERACRUZANO, VERACRUZ, MEXICO (Abstract ID: 29677
| Poster ID: 698)

A CASE STUDY OF ECOSYSTEM-BASED FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN PUERTO

Sixty sites on 24 reefs were surveyed at the Parque Nacional Sistema Arrecifal Veracruzano (PNSAV) in the southwestern Gulf of Mexico, creating the most robust data
These data were collected to support effective management of the Park. A total of 6,231
colonies were assessed representing 30 species including six species listed as threatened
under the US Endangered Species Act and the IUCN Red list. Threatened species represented 25% of all colonies recorded and at least one of these species occurred on 21 of
the 24 reefs surveyed. Orbicella faveolata was the second most abundant species (17%
were 16 cm and <6% mortality. These findings provide evidence that these coral reefs
are unique having survived continuous anthropogenic impacts for hundreds of years due
to their location off the coast of a large urban settlement and commercial shipping area,

Ecosystem-based fisheries management (EBFM) is gaining popularity as an alternative to traditional fisheries management approaches. In western Puerto Rico, the Abrir
La Sierra, Bajo de Sico, and Tourmaline (ABT) Spawning Aggregation Areas share
management between Puerto Rico and the Caribbean Fishery Management Council.
Included within the boundaries of ABT are areas of ecological, social, and economic
importance, including mesophotic reefs, multi-species spawning grounds, and traditional
ABT, new management approaches were recently proposed for these areas, which have
been traditionally managed by focusing on single species or particular habitats. However,
due to competing interests from multiple user groups, fear of loss of resource access,
the perception that there is not enough background information to justify changes in
management, and a lack of interest for compromising or addressing trade-offs within the
ecosystem, the proposal was unsuccessful. This outcome demonstrates the difficulties
National Marine Fisheries Service EBFM policy is established, it may be difficult to
implement because of the current management framework and the constraints inherent
in that management. We also discuss communication difficulties within a cross-cultural
environment, and the steps that fisheries managers and constituents are taking to resolve



UNCOVERING WITHIN-COLONY GENETIC DIVERSITY USING HIGHTHROUGHPUT SEQUENCING DATA OF CORALS (Abstract ID: 28276)
Genetic mutations provide variability upon which selection acts, and are thus an essential quality for adaptation. High-throughput sequencing generates genomic datasets from
which we can identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) among samples. These
analyses have been done frequently across coral colonies, but not from multiple samples
within a single colony. Because coral polyps within a colony are typically asexual clones,
intra-colony genetic differences most likely arise from somatic mutations during growth.
We analyzed genotype calls of samples from 23Acropora hyacinthus colonies and 36
Toolkit (GATK), we compared the genotypes of all samples taken from one colony. We
filtered through the SNPs called across a colony’s samples to identify what we refer to
as “top candidates” for true markers of intra-colony variation. This method allows us to
colony displayed the highest rate of top candidates for somatic mutants per number of
by somatic mutations may represent an additional source of adaptive potential for coral
colonies as their environments are altered by climate change.

COAST-REEF SCALE PHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES OF ACROPORA MURICATA
HARBORING SIMILAR SYMBIODINIUM GENOTYPES (Abstract ID: 29413)
Coral bleaching events are increasing worldwide as a result of climate change. Coral
show differential bleaching susceptibilities depending on host and/or symbiont
responses to changing environmental factors. Coral responses have been shown to
vary over broad geographical scales with thermally-disparate environments. Of these
responses, physiological characteristics such as Symbiodinium density and size, chlorophyll a content and estimated productivity along a coast-reef scale (<1 km) remain
to be thoroughly studied. In this study, we examined these characteristics seasonally in
Acropora muricata colonies that harbor similar symbiont genotypes along a coast-reef
scale in Belle Mare lagoon, Mauritius. The studied reef and near-coast habitats displayed
contrasting environmental conditions and bleaching histories with bleaching occurring
only at the reef in 2009. We observed similar symbiont densities and cell sizes, albeit
with seasonal variation, within corals from both stations. Chlorophyll a content was 3031% lower in reef than near-coast colonies, irrespective of sampling season. Chlorophyll
a content was significantly influenced by station. Estimated productivity was influenced
by prevailing environmental conditions, with summer samples of near-coast colonies
displaying 52% higher values than reef colony samples. This significant difference was
maintained but less pronounced (18%) in winter samples. Our data suggest that similar
Symbiodinium genotypes may show physiological acclimatization along a coast-reef
scale as a consequence of variable environmental conditions.


INTRACOLONY VARIABILITY OF THE PHOTOSYNTHETIC PERFORMANCE
AND ENERGY BALANCE IN THE SCLERACTINIAN CORAL ORBICELLA FAVEOLATA (Abstract ID: 28452)


The incidence of solar radiation on coral surface is highly variable across massive
colonies, where changes of inclination play an important role. To analyze the effect of
surface inclination on the holobiont physiology, we exposed fragments of the scleractinian coral Orbicella faveolata to 5 inclinations from 0° to 90°, reproducing a light
gradient of an order of magnitude variation. A linear correlation was found between the
inclination angle and the light intensity, more likely due to a high diffuse-light component
on less irradiated surfaces. Photosynthetic descriptors showed important changes
in the photoacclimatory response of the holobiont. This plasticity allowed vertical
oriented surfaces to achieve a positive carbon balance during part of the daytime, albeit

HIGHEST SPECIES DIVERSITY OF OCTOCORALS FOUND IN CARIBBEAN AND
A NEW VARIABLE NUCLEAR MARKER FOR THE OCTOCORALLIA? (Abstract ID:
28728)
We have observed the highest recorded octocoral diversity in the Caribbean around the
Honduran island of Utila, the eastern-most extent of the Meso-American Barrier Reef
System. Additionally, the nuclear gene, ALG11, has been tested for its barcoding accuracy for the first time in Cnidaria. Originally tested in sponges, ALG11 was considered

205

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

a potential barcoding marker for slow-evolving mitochondrial organisms (Belinky et al.,
2012). Extensive unresolved relationships between species exist within octocorals or ‘soft
corals’. We studied a group of common Caribbean gorgonians, chiefly of the species-rich
genus Eunicea and compared its phylogenetic potential with current mitochondrial
mtMutS and COI combined, and is a potential candidate for population genetic studies.
Morphological and ecological differences are related to genetic characters such as wellestablished adaptations to depth (Prada et al., 2008). Intensive morphometric analysis
is included in a detailed inter and intra-species phylogeny to investigate character states
new variable DNA marker for sponge phylogeny: comparison of phylogenetic performances with the 18S rDNA and the COI gene. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution,
or speciation? A case from a clonal marine organism. BMC Evol Biol, 8, 1-19.

DOES CORAL REEF STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY AFFECT DENSITY OR TROPHIC LEVEL OF A HABITAT-SPECIALIST SPINY LOBSTER? (Abstract ID: 28810 |
Poster ID: 296)
The spotted spiny lobster, Panulirus guttatus, is a sedentary, obligate Caribbean coral
reef-dweller with a limited home range. To explore whether loss of reef structural
complexity could potentially affect populations of this habitat specialist, we selected two
separate coral reef patches (11,200 and 14,000 m2 in surface area) in Puerto Morelos
(Mexico) and assessed their structural complexity using the rugosity index and the
belt transects and sampled 30 lobsters to compare their stomach contents, three condition indices (weight/carapace length ratio, hepatosomatic index, blood refractive index),
and stable isotope values (delta15N and delta13C). Rugosity index and HAS differed
significantly between reef patches, but the less complex patch, though more flattened,
still exhibited many crevices (potential shelters); hence, lobster density did not vary with
reef patch. Lobsters consumed many food types, particularly mollusks and crustaceans,
but consumed proportionally more coralline algae and fewer crustaceans in the more
complex patch relative to the less complex patch. Lobsters in both reefs had a similar
condition (all three indices) and trophic level, as suggested by similar mean delta15N
values, but differed in mean delta13C values, indicating differences in organic carbon
sources between reefs. Our results suggest that loss of structural complexity, at least to
the degree of our less complex patch, has no apparent effects on density, condition, or


DIVE TOURISM AND ITS IMPACT ON INTEGRATED COASTAL MANAGEMENT
AND LIVELIHOODS FOR ARTISANAL FISHERS (Abstract ID: 27903)
The Coral Triangle, home to the most biodiverse coral reefs in the world with more than
600 coral species and 3000 fish species, encompasses Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New
Guinea, the Philippines, Solomon Islands and Timor Leste. These countries have formed
the Coral Triangle Initiative on Coral Reefs, Fisheries and Food Security to conserve coral
reefs. Over 240 million people rely on Coral Triangle coral reefs for income and food
security, yet they are threatened by destructive fishing and other impacts. Dive tourism is
cited for its capacity to conserve coral reefs and diversify the livelihoods of artisanal fishers,
reducing their reliance on fishing for income and food security. Because it is not known
whether dive tourism contributes significantly to conservation, livelihoods, or reduction of
destructive fishing; or the extent to which traditional marine tenure is supported, we survey
dive operators in the Coral Triangle, using an integrated coastal management framework.
Our preliminary findings are that some dive operators do little for conservation, livelihoods
or reduction of destructive fishing; and fail to recognise traditional marine tenure. In contrast, a few dive operators make major contributions to integrated coastal management by
recognising traditional marine tenure and working with fishers as stakeholders. Our study
analyses factors that lead to success in dive tourism’s contribution to integrated coastal
management and the extent to which success can be replicated. We also outline three case
studies of best practice in the Coral Triangle and the Pacific.


INVESTIGATING THE EFFECTS OF SUBMARINE GROUNDWATER DISCHARGE
(SGD) ON CORAL GROWTH AND BIOEROSION ON TWO SHALLOW REEF
Coastal marine ecosystems exist in highly variable physicochemical environments due
to biological processes, restricted water motion, terrestrial influences, and feedbacks
between benthic productivity and reef calcification. This variability can be augmented
by land-based nutrient inputs, which increase productivity and alter carbonate chemistry.
Because there is a strong relationship between carbonate parameters, such as pH, and
coral calcification and bioerosion, nutrients can impact the accretion-erosion balance on
coral reefs. Submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) is a common source of nutrientrich water into shallow reef systems, yet we know little about how SGD influences coral
growth and bioerosion. We used natural SGD gradients at two sites in Maunalua Bay,
Oahu to assess the effect of SGD on coral growth and reef bioerosion. Coral nubbins
(Porites lobata) and bioerosion blocks were deployed across the gradient for six months
and one year, respectively. Coral growth was determined using buoyant weights and photos; bioerosion was quantified by comparing before and after µCT scans. To describe the
chemical environment created by SGD, we collected water samples (pH, total alkalinity,
salinity, inorganic nutrients, and chlorophyll a) at each experimental location during high
and low tide over 24 hour periods in the dry and rainy seasons. These data are crucial in
helping understand the accretion-erosion dynamics of SGD-impacted reefs, especially
in high islands like Hawaii, where SGD makes up a large portion of freshwater input to
coastal reefs.


COLONY SIZE-FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF POCILLOPORID JUVENILE
CORALS ALONG A NATURAL ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENT IN THE RED SEA
(Abstract ID: 28435 | Poster ID: 289)
Coral colony size-frequency distributions can be used to assess population responses
to local environmental conditions and disturbances. In this study, we surveyed juvenile
pocilloporids, herbivorous fish densities, and algal cover in the central and southern
Saudi Arabian Red Sea. We sampled nine reefs with different disturbance histories along
a north–south natural gradient of physicochemical conditions (higher salinity and wider
temperature fluctuations in the north, and higher turbidity and productivity in the south).
Since coral populations with negatively skewed size-frequency distributions have been
associated with unfavorable environmental conditions, we expected to find more negative
distributions in the southern Red Sea, where corals are potentially experiencing suboptimal conditions. Although juvenile coral and parrotfish densities differed significantly
between the two regions, mean colony size and size-frequency distributions did not. Results suggest that pocilloporid colony size-frequency distribution may not be an accurate
indicator of differences in biological or oceanographic conditions in the Red Sea.


TRAIT MATCHING IN REEF FISH-CORAL SPECIES ASSOCIATIONS (Abstract ID:
29827)
Reef-building corals are foundational species on coral reefs, creating a complex
three-dimensional structure that offers space and food resources for a wide array of
organisms, including fishes. In this study we evaluated the relative importance of species
morphological, behavioural and ecological traits in determining relationships among
of corals and fishes in interacting species pairs). Identifying the traits associated with
interacting species pairs, and whether these interactions are general or obligatory, will
shed light on how the loss of coral species influences the fish community. We compiled
literature records of associations between fishes and corals and combined these with
coral and fish trait databases. Using generalised mixed-effects models, we show that
trait matching between species pairs predict species associations better than analysing
traits of corals and fishes separately. More specifically, matching levels of coral growth
form and fish body size were the best predictors of species interactions. We suggest that
matching traits of interacting species potentially can reveal the mechanisms behind close


206

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

relationships between fishes and corals. The identification of interdependences between
functional traits of interacting species is important for predicting the outcome of species
loss due to environmental change.

UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS (UAS) FOR COASTAL AND REEF ECOSYSTEM
MONITORING AND FISHPOND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEYS OFF LANA’I,
HAWAII (Abstract ID: 29974)

(Abstract ID: 29818 | Poster ID: 87)

The east coast of Lana’i is flanked by extensive shallow reefs and five traditional
fishponds. However, the reef ecosystems of Lana’i remain among the least studied in
Hawaii. Historical land use on Lana’i included significant destruction of the native flora
by cattle, sheep and goats, followed by pineapple monoculture. In many areas the island
was left with bare soil. This not only increased sediment runoff onto reefs, but also
reduced the ability of the land to absorb water thereby reducing submarine backreef
spring nutrient inputs to coastal waters. The past 20 years of land development on
Lana’i further exacerbated soil runoff during heavy rains. We describe use of VTOL
(Vertical Take Off and Landing) unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) with video cameras as
a rapidly deployed tool for monitoring both sediment runoff and reef ecosystem health
on Lana’i. This included assessing UAS multispectral imaging to quantify the temporal
variability of groundwater inputs to the reef. We also discuss coordination with the Lana’i
Cultural Heritage Center and Lana’i City High School using unmanned aircraft to map
the island’s five traditional fishponds. The ability of UAS to be rapidly deployed and
cover extensive coastal areas in a single day was demonstrated as a valuable tool for
monitoring runoff and reef ecosystems of Lana’i.

Laboratory coral culture experiments have suggested that the coral symbiotic system is
capable of both assimilating dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) from ambient seawater
via zooxanthellae (N autotrophy) and acquiring N from heterotrophic feeding (N heterotrophy). However, it remains poorly understood which serves as the primary N source for
reefs in different ocean environments. In the central equatorial Pacific, corals experience
N sources, because (1) both DIN and food are available; (2) DIN changes greatly from
El Niño to La Niña years; and (3) due to the incomplete surface DIN consumption in the
equatorial Pacific, natural abundance 15N/14N ratios (d15N) can be used to distinguish
between the autotrophic and heterotrophic N sources. Previous measurements from
Jarvis Island (160 W, 0.5 S) have shown nitrate concentrations to be as high as 16 uM
(La Niña, 2008) and as low as 3 uM (moderate El Niño, 2010). In our most recent sampling campaign in Nov. 2015, when El Niño strength was at its highest since 1998, we
measurements of nitrate and nitrite, particulate organic matter and size-fractionated
plankton, as well as the d15N of coral tissue and zooxanthellae. These data will be
discussed in terms of their implications for the relative importance of N autotrophy and
heterotrophy by the corals.

TO BE, OR NOT TO BE NOTICED: THE IMPORTANCE OF SPICULAR ANALYSIS
FOR RECONSTRUCTIONS OF SPONGE COMMUNITIES IN MODERN CORAL
REEFS (Abstract ID: 27814)
Sponges are a key and inseparable component of modern coral reefs. The knowledge
of their taxonomic diversity is thus crucial for ecological considerations of these
ecosystems. However, some sponge species might be easily overlooked due to their
cryptic and/or excavating nature. This problem might often be solved using the method
of spicular analysis. It enables to recognize spicule morphotypes by means of detailed
examination of surficial sediments. Here, the spicular analysis has been applied to study
the sponge-spicule assemblage in the lagoon reef of Bocas del Toro, Panama. The
method allowed to identify some highly diagnostic spicule morphotypes. They belong
and Alectona wallichii, that have not been noticed in this area so far. The last two of them
were previously known only from Indian Ocean, and Japanese and South African waters,
respectively. The presence of these species enriches our knowledge of the ecological
interactions within the coral reef ecosystem of the studied area. Despite some limitations, the method of spicular analysis proves to be useful as a supplementary tool for the
reconstruction of modern shallow-water sponge communities.


A POLYP FROM NOTHING: THE EXTREME REGENERATION CAPACITY OF THE
ID: 29393 | Poster ID: 225)
dramatically changed the diversity in shallow-waters along São Paulo coastline. In
additional to rapid settlement and growth that facilitate their spread and substrate
dominance, some Tubastraea spp. polyps at Búzios Island were observed recovering
from fragmentation. Moreover, on the sandy substrate below these colonies, small
solitary polyps were found. To better understand this regeneration capacity, colonies
of both species were fragmented into pieces, and its regeneration ability was tested in
terms of food supply (unfed and fed), temperature (24°C, 27°C and 30°C), and fragment
size (small - 6.9±1.96 mm² and large - 22.15±9.2 mm²). Within the 240 fragments, 83%
fully regenerated into one or more new viable polyps. The minimum fragment size that
enabled regeneration was 3.51 mm² and, overall, live tissue retreated around 45% and
new polyp. The regeneration was more successful on lower temperature, in unfed larger
fragments. However, it was slower if compared to higher temperatures (about 8 days
tagusensis can be formed from the regeneration of small skeleton fragments containing
tissue, enhancing the chances of survival after injury and adding another mechanism
contributing to their invasive success.


CORALLIVOROUS FISH PREY ON PORITES LOBATA AT SOUTH JAVA SEA,
INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 29454 | Poster ID: 127)
South Java sea (8o23’48.73” S; 112o31’3.59” E) is directly adjacent with the Indian
Ocean that has big waves and strong currents. This condition became main factor that
only massive coral can growing well and dominate than other coral life form. Poritiids
and Faviids coral were found abundant in this area. One of bio-eroder of coral reef is
corallivorous fishes. There are about 128 species of corallivorous fishes from 11 different
families. Impact of fish bites in coral were became threat of degradation of living coral
cover due to the spread of disease and wound in colonies of coral. We observed the fish
bite for 14 months (April 2014 - May 2015) on 4 colonies of Porites lobata. Each colony
was divided into three plots, the upper part (A), middle part (T) and bottom part (B), on
each plot was divided into 4 sub-plots. Then We recorded all various bites mark in each
sub-plot using underwater camera and classified as new bytes, old bites and recovery. The
total amount of fish bites was 4,315 for 14 months or 25.7 bites/ month. The highest coral
bite was in November 2014, with 409 new bites. The most bites were found on upper part
(A) area (1,913 bites), second one on middle part (T) area (1,441 bites) and the fewest on
the bottom part (B) area (961). There were three species of fish that prey on Porites lobata
Parrotfish prefer to eat the algae which was located in the middle part, probably that were
many algae attached in this part and naturally parrot fish prey always on schooling


INTEGRATING CORAL LARVAE INTO POLICY COMPLIANCE USING BULK
PLANKTONIC SAMPLES FOUND PEAK LARVAL DENSITY OF 600 PER CUBIC
METER, 9 DAYS AFTER THE FULL MOON (Abstract ID: 29892 | Poster ID: 701)
Environmental policy implementation is confronted with difficult and uncomfortable
challenges when dealing with coral larvae. Particularly for species protected by the US
Endangered Species Act (ESA). This study presents coral larvae density data collected
from plankton tows to predict the potential impacts of entraining a large volume of cool207

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

ing water at a proposed offshore facility near the Jobos Bay National Estuarine Research
Reserve, Puerto Rico. Sampling of coral larvae in pelagic waters has not been widely
performed. Our approach used 200 μm mesh plankton tows, targeted the surface and 8
m depth, roughly 40 m3, occurred day and night, and counted larvae while live. Surveys
in August, September, and October 2015 captured statistically genuine peaks in larval
density for August and September, each lasting about 5 days centered about 9 days after
the full moon. Coral larvae density ranged from 446 to 6,532 individuals per 100 m3
during peaks and 0 to 83 ind/100m3 off-peak. Densities in October did not exceed 290
ind/100m3 and planktonic coral larvae were noted in November but not enumerated.
There was no statistical difference between day and night samples, and densities at the
surface were about 50% less than at depth. Modeling based on the reproductive biomass
at nearby reefs suggests that about 9% of these larvae could be ESA Threatened species.
This study culminates with leading-edge policy implementation guidance representing
close coordination with NMFS and EPA that maximizes opportunities to avoid and
minimize impacts to ESA-listed corals at their larval stage.

THE EFFECTIVENESS OF MARINE PROTECTED AREAS ON CONSERVING THE
Fisheries on the Egyptian coast of the Gulf of Aqaba are conducted mainly by the local
community (Bedouin). It is a traditional activity where fish are mainly used for subsistence and the surplus consider a source of income. As part of the effort of the Egyptian
government to protect the coral reef ecosystem and maintain this traditional activities,
a network of three Marine Protected Areas in the Gulf of Aqaba were established. In
this study, we investigated the change in diversity, density and size of fish populations (9
families) over 10 years (2002-2012) of conservation efforts in the Gulf of Aqaba. Four
regions were studied, with different level of protection and fishing pressure. We found
that Nabq decreased significantly in total species by 2012, while Dahab significantly
increased in both total species and diversity. Nabq and Ras Mohamed National Park
decreased significantly in fish abundance by 51% and 39% respectively while Dahab the
least region in fish abundance increased by 75% over time. Size of the target herbivore
and carnivore species were significantly decreased over time with Nabq and Dahab
having the smallest fish size by the end of our study. Fishing pressure has been increasing in Nabq and affecting the fish population dramatically, due to Dahab fishers and
non-compliance by fishing the No Take Zones, even in the Ras Mohamed National Park,
fishing occurred causing decline in abundance of target species. Ensuring long term
effective law enforcement is critical for the Marine Protected Areas to maintain the fish
populations in the Gulf of Aqaba.


EXPANDING THE REEF RESTORATION TOOL BOX: DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW
INVSIVE ALGAE CONTROL METHOD IN HAWAII (Abstract ID: 29105)
The Nature Conservancy (TNC), along with partners at the Hawaii Division of Aquatic
Resources, is actively trying to control the spread of Eucheuma deniticulum, an invasive
non-native alga currently restricted to Kaneohe Bay. Using a combination of mechanical
by outplanting of cultured, native sea urchins to control regrowth (the Super Sucker
method), Eucheuma cover on treated reefs can be reduced to <5% cover. Unfortunately,
sea urchin propagation has not keep pace with clearing activities, necessitating the
development of a method that does not require sea urchin outplanting to be successful.
In response, TNC developed and tested a new Eucheuma control method (the 100%
Clear) on Koamano, a 0.45 ha patch reef in Kaneohe Bay. For this method, control
crews used fine tools to remove all Eucheumafragments from the reef (over 450 kg of
algae), theoretically eliminating the need for sea urchin outplanting. After 12 months,
Eucheuma regrowth on Koamano was negligible compared to control plots where algae
regrew to pre-clearance levels in 4-6 months. Permanent photo-quadrats on Koamano
documented coral tissue regrowth in “dead areas” following removal of overgrowing
Eucheuma, conclusively demonstrating positive benefits of algae removal. While time
needed to clear the reef was greater for the 100% Clear than the Super Sucker method,
time and cost savings were realized during post-clearing maintenance, making the 100%
Clear method a viable alternative for invasive algae control.


ECOLOGICAL DETERMINANTS OF DEPTH RANGES IN CORAL-FEEDING BUTTERFLYFISH: ARE DEEP REEFS A REFUGE? (Abstract ID: 28143)
Declining coral abundance on many reefs globally is altering the composition of coral
reef fish communities. Many reef fish species depend on live coral for a range of
ecological processes, but coral specialists such as obligate coral feeders are among the
most threatened. The most severe declines in coral abundance often occur in shallow
water and deeper reefs may therefore provide a refuge for reef fish if they can maintain
suitable stable habitat in the face of shallow water reef degradation. However, the
ecological factors influencing depth distributions in coral reef fishes are currently poorly
understood, and our ability to assess the depth refuge potential has therefore been limited. Here, we analyse how resource use, territorial area, territorial behavior, movement,
and body condition of an obligate coral feeding butterflyfish species varies along a depth
gradient from 0-40m. We relate patterns in these behaviours to changes in the availability
and nutritional quality of food sources along the depth gradient and across time to
demonstrate that suitable deep-water habitat can provide a refuge for an obligate coral
feeding reef fish in a clear-water, low-latitude reef system.



CONTINENTAL SCALE ESTUARINE WATER QUALITY TRENDS FROM REMOTE
SENSING TIME SERIES (Abstract ID: 29034 | Poster ID: 543)


The relationship between reefs and water quality is well studied, and has led to an
intensive effort in many places worldwide to mitigate and eliminate both point- and
diffuse-source pollution. Monitoring the efficacy of palliative action on water quality
can be difficult, and is a significant issue in Australia, since the whole gamut of reef
types exist along its extensive and often isolated coastline. Gauging station data has
high accuracy and temporal resolution, but the spatial coverage is poor and is often
limited to upstream water quality. Water quality data has been successfully derived from
satellite data for deeper coastal waters, but has yet to provide consistent information at
the coastal interface. There have been many local scale empirical studies looking at individual estuary or reef systems, but as yet there has not been a consistent analysis over
all estuaries in Australia defined by OzCoasts (~600) from 1987 to 2015. We obtained
time-series stacks of Landsat reflectance for each estuary via Geoscience Australia’s
Data Cube infrastructure, which included data from the TM, ETM+ and OLI sensors. We
used simple analytical water quality metrics to explore various trends and hypotheses
with smoothing techniques and linear models. Models ranged from simple linear models
with a single linear term, to generalised additive models, with both fixed and random effects, including terms to account for seasonality, catchment properties, as well as estuary
type, size, and status.

Coral reef health in Laolao Bay, Saipan, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands has deteriorated over the past several decades due to resource over-harvesting,
land-based sources of pollution, and climate change. The Bay is most susceptible to
effects of land-based sources of pollution, such as sedimentation and polluted runoff.
Corals respond physiologically to environmental stress by increasing or decreasing levels
of various regulatory proteins or biomarkers. Heat-shock proteins and detoxification
enzymes are examples of proteins used by corals to cope with heat or toxicant stress.
These molecular biomarkers can be quantified and used by managers to evaluate coral
health. Local government agencies have begun to restore the Laolao Bay watershed
in hopes of improving coastal water quality and associated coral reef health in Laolao
Bay. My research will investigate the change of coral health in response to the Laolao
Bay watershed restoration project. Stress-associated biomarkers in the reef coralPorites
lobata will be quantified from samples collected before and after the restoration project.
The results of this study will 1) provide resource managers with key information on the
specific stressors affecting the corals studied and 2) provide baseline information for
future comparison and for tracking the effectiveness of land-based mitigation measures.
Knowing the causal effects of coral stress is important for the “real time” conservation
and management of Laolao Bay coral reef ecosystem.

208

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



COOPERATIVE PARTNERSHIP FOR CORAL REEF CONSERVATION (Abstract ID:
29807)

PERSISTING TERPIOS HOSHINOTA OUTBREAKS IN INDONESIAN REEFS – PROLIFERATION, INVASION OR TRANSITION? (Abstract ID: 28472 | Poster ID: 72)

The Nature Conservancy and the NOAA Coral Reef Conservation Program recently
completed a $10 million six-year partnership to support effective management and
protection of coral reefs. The work focused on providing planning, science, and on-theground implementation activities in Hawaii, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
strategies were further leveraged through global capacity building activities for coral reef
managers. This presentation will outline TNC, NOAA and local resource management
agency contributions to support this body of work, and will highlight processes for
effective collaboration, progress made and lessons learned in the implementation of
long-term cooperative agreements to build coral reef management capacity.

Proliferative growth of Terpios hoshinota in a coral reef was first reported by Bryan (1973)
in Guam, Northern Marianas. Since then, outbreaks of the encrusting and coral-killing
nature. In Indonesian waters, the so-called black disease sponge has been reported only
recently. From 2013 to 2015 we surveyed coral reefs across the Indonesian archipelago
for Terpios hoshinota. These surveys revealed that the sponge so far has been severely
underreported in Indonesia. Alarmed by these frequent occurrences and their wide geographical range. With our present survey we have shown that under certain circumstances outbreaks may persist over several years. Consistent with previous studies, the sites
where we found high abundances of Terpios where characterized by high nutrient levels,
high turbidity, and extensive physical destruction to the reef. The numerous discoveries
of Terpios in our survey may be interpreted as corroboration of this hypothesis, but may
also be explained by the proliferation of a native species or simply by the fact that the
sponge has recently been more frequently recognized because it is has received a wider
attention. Coral reefs may undergo a phase-shift towards sponge-dominated reefs and a
proliferation of Terpios on reefs may be one indication of such a global transition.

FUNCTION-BASED MANAGEMENT OF MULTISPECIES REEF FISHERIES (Abstract ID: 28319)


Coral reef fisheries often include multispecies catches that are rarely well monitored,
making traditional fisheries management impractical in many places. Even with some
form of fisheries restriction present, it is difficult to set management objectives and
evaluate their effectiveness without clear ecosystem targets. I will outline our regional
and global approach to solving these problems through multiple large-scale analyses of
reef fish biomass. I start by highlighting ecosystem tipping points across gradients of
fishable biomass and link these to a function-based approach to fisheries management.
I go on to show that while more than 80% of fished reefs have lost more than half their
expected reef fish biomass, few coral reef fisheries have collapsed completely, with the
majority of fished reefs maintaining important ecosystem functions above biomass levels
associated with a predictable series of rapid declines. Encouragingly, the majority of reef
fisheries can maintain functionality by adopting one of several management alternatives
that support both livelihoods and ecosystems. This large-scale analyses provides an
empirical basis for relatively simple fisheries guidelines at the local scale, conditional on
factors relating to environmental setting, catch composition, and social context. Where
people want to sustain their fisheries and are willing to restrict them in some way, effective multispecies reef fishery management is possible in most jurisdictions.

THE PULLEY RIDGE INTERACTIVE DECISION SUPPORT RESOURCE (DSR)
(Abstract ID: 29536 | Poster ID: 190)



Connectivity of the Pulley Ridge - South Florida Coral Reef Ecosystem: Process to DecisionSupport Tools, is studying the Pulley Ridge mesophotic coral community in order to
better understand its connection to the ecosystems of the Florida Keys National Marine
Sanctuary, other ecosystems in Florida, the Gulf of Mexico, Bahamas, and Caribbean
region. The results of this study will improve understanding of the physical and ecological
processes that affect Pulley Ridge. This improved understanding can then inform decision
making regarding management, conservation or protection of Pulley Ridge based on its
connections to other communities in the region. As part of this project, the Pulley Ridge
Decision Support Resource (DSR) is being developed to provide comprehensive access
to scientific data and analyses generated by the project. This publicly available web-based
application is written in Java, Javascript, and HTML, and makes use of Apache Solr to
provide a rich user interface and rapid search capabilities. Users may search across datasets, view previews and summaries of dataset contents, as well as access and download
published data, model output and analyses using text, concept and map-based searches.

TOWARDS AN EMPIRICAL DEMONSTRATION THAT HEALTHY REEFS NEED
SHARKS: EMERGING POLICY AND MANAGEMENT TOOLS TO SUPPORT THE
CASE FOR PROTECTION (Abstract ID: 29100)
A prevailing opinion that coral reefs can be conserved by simply protecting the grazers
at lower trophic levels misses the implications of rates of energy flow on reef systems
and the resultant mitigating role that reef predators such as sharks play. The relationship
between top predators and coral reef health is not obvious. Until recently, scientists did
not believe a coral reef could even support a large biomass of top predators because the
ecological models came from grasslands with much slower rates of energy turnover. The
rates at which the primary producers, sharks, and microbes are growing are the essential
paths that link top predators to coral reef health. Unfortunately, compared to standing
stocks of sharks and corals, rates are much harder to measure and visualize. From a
conservation policy perspective, the lack of a simplified, instructive model that communicates the reality of rates and the invisibility of energy flow creates a major conceptual
challenge when trying to convey the importance of sharks to mostly non-scientist
policy makers. Meeting this challenge head-on, this presentation describes a pioneering
collaboration currently underway between scientists and conservation professionals to
bridge the conceptual hurdle of rates and energy flow on reefs through the development
of an interactive online visualization tool that demonstrates the role of apex predators as
energy sinks and mediators of reef health. We also propose an assessment of jurisdictions most receptive to stronger legislative protection of sharks as a result of this new
understanding.

A TRAIT-BASED APPROACH TO ADVANCE CORAL REEF SCIENCE (Abstract ID: 28507)
Modern coral reefs are biologically diverse and ecologically complex ecosystems
constructed by stony corals. Despite decades of research, basic questions relating to coral
population biology and community ecology remain unanswered. Trait-based research
can lead to improved understanding and management of ecological systems, which is
vital in the current era of rapid environmental change. Here, we first present a database
of species- and individual-level information from published field and experimental studies
and improvements from the community. We contend that progress in addressing basic
questions in population biology and community ecology has been hampered by a paucity
of trait data for many, often rare, species and reliance on non-quantitative approaches.
Therefore, we present an approach that focuses on filling data gaps by prioritizing traits
that are easy to measure, estimating key traits and vital rates for species with missing data,
and identifying “super-traits” that capture a large amount of variation for a broad range of
biological, ecological and evolutionary processes. We believe that such approaches will
accelerate our understanding of coral biology and ecology, and therefore our ability to
protect this critically threatened global ecosystem.
209

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


and value of setting multiple conservation objectives, support efforts to expand MPAs for
Brazilian coral reefs, and yield insights for planners of coral-reef MPAs elsewhere.

THE ENIGMATIC DIVERSITY OF SCLERACTINIAN-ASSOCIATED HYDROZOANS
(Abstract ID: 28337)
Scleractinian reef corals are able to establish intimate associations with several organisms. Recently, hydrozoans have been included into the plethora of coral symbionts.
These poorly known hydrozoans belong to the genus Zanclea and are strictly associated
with their hosts, growing partially embedded by coral tissues. In this work, we evaluated
the ecology and the diversity of this symbiosis through the integration of ecological,
morphological and molecular approaches. Coral-associated hydrozoans were found in
several geographical localities including Indo-Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean and Red
Sea and were associated with 29 coral host genera. According to polyps and medusae
morphology, three morpho-types were identified. Nevertheless, molecular phylogenetic
analyses revealed an unexpectedly high genetic diversity and several divergent molecular clades were identified. The majority of these genetic lineages were host-specific and
cryptic since they were not detectable through morphological analyses. We therefore
applied DNA taxonomy techniques to our dataset and we identified several independent
species. With the exception of one highly generalist species, the other detected cryptic
species could be identified integrating morphological characters, host genus and in few
cases geographic provenience. Overall, this work suggests that these diminutive hydroids
are more widespread and more commonly associated with coral than previously known
and that they hide an unexpected cryptic biodiversity.

ASSESSMENT OF A BARNACLE BIOERODER AND ITS IMPACT ON A DOMINANT REEF-BUILDING CORAL FROM A HIGH CORAL COVER REEF (Abstract ID:
29765 | Poster ID: 244)
Although multiple studies use density as a proxy for the impact of macrobioeroders
on a coral reef, few assess the only genus of thoracican barnacles known to burrow,
