A holistic and scientific basis for achieving ecosystem-based management is needed
to counter the continuing degradation of coral reefs. A holistic basis for sustainability
is developed that includes information on reported and modeled yields, biomass and
ecosystem thresholds, biomass recovery rates, and changes in yield over time. The coral
reef fisheries literature reports high variability but this aligns well with high variation
reported for biomass recovery and associated logistic model yield predictions. Recovery
rate variability can, however, be attributed to a number of factors other than variation in
endogenous production, including poor compliance and movement of fish into closures.
Nevertheless, high harvest rate variation is more likely due to both temporary and long
term harvesting beyond sustainable levels. For a conservative stock of 0.50 pristine
biomass (~50 tons/km2), the most controlled recovery studies predicted mean yields of
7 tons/km2/y but high variability ranging from 2 to 13 tons/km2/y. There are few studies of reef fisheries yields over time but Kenyan fisheries studied for >10 years indicate
that yields of > 6.9 tons/km2/y were not sustainable. Fish production at low biomass
can increase and offset predicted declines in yields but biomass studies in Kenya found
a small increase that would be insufficient to avoid declining yields. Ecological change
occurs prior to the logistic model’s maximum yield predictions, with 3 of 8 abrupt
sustainable yields and a variety of metrics suggest that it should be maintained above 50
tons/km2 to avoid unsustainable yields.


OPERATIONALISING THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE FOR DEALING WITH
UNCERTAINTY: THE EFFECTS OF DREDGING ON THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
AS A CASE STUDY (Abstract ID: 29920)
Management agencies and policy-makers must make decisions and take action in the
face of uncertain and often controversial knowledge, as illustrated by public debate
about the effects of dredging on the Great Barrier Reef (GBR). Although the Precautionary Principle is often advocated for such situations, for government agencies it risks
being operationally/politically infeasible, amounting to a “disallow everything” until all
scientific questions have been definitively answered; this may take decades. Taking an innovative approach to dredging impacts on the GBR, we assembled a panel with a broad
range of expertise and perspectives. We then developed an independent, balanced
compilation of the full range of expert views. Rather than aiming for a single, definitive
“consensus” view on all matters, we took a more pragmatic approach of identifying
areas of i. agreed knowledge, ii. agreed knowledge gaps, and ii. areas where the experts
don’t agree. This allows progress, instead of getting caught in contention and controversy.
In this case, many but not all of the experts consider that dredging effects have probably
been historically under-estimated. Their main concern was the long-term contributions
to fine sediments and turbidity, by ongoing resuspension of dredge material, especially
at disposal sites. The direct effects of excavation and burial are severe but have a limited
footprint. Our approach provided a timely scientific foundation (of knowledge and
uncertainty), contributing to a major shift in policy including banning marine disposal of
sediments from capital dredging.


STRONG SPATIAL SIGNAL OF CORAL LOSS DETECTED FROM 240 YEAR-OLD
NAUTICAL CHARTS (Abstract ID: 28008)
Large declines in the cover of live coral have been documented across the Caribbean
over the scale of decades. However, analyses based on recent data alone may may
whole reefs). Therefore, creating temporally extended spatially-specific baselines based
on historical data is important to quantify the full extent of long-term change. Early
nautical charts provide one solution to the issue of lacking spatial data over long time
scales; high-resolution nautical charts produced as part of European colonial expansion
frequently contain high quality ecological information that can be used to reconstruct
spatial change, but remain an underutilized source of information in quantifying longterm ecological change. Here, we use 18th century British nautical charts to quantify
spatial changes and overall loss of coral reef habitat in the Florida Keys over 240 years.
We find a strong spatial dimension to this decline; coral in Florida Bay and near shore
declined substantially, while offshore coral remained largely intact. The near complete
elimination of near-shore coral represents an under-appreciated spatial component of
the shifting baseline syndrome, with important lessons for other species and ecosystems. In particular, assessments of change focusing only on species’ extant range may
overlook larger-scale loss over longer time frames and provide overly optimistic views of
their current conservation status and underestimate restoration potential.


SOUNDS LIKE TROUBLE: ANTHROPOGENIC SOUND IMPACTS REEF FISH
DYNAMICS (Abstract ID: 27818)
Anthropogenic noise may have detrimental effects on the ecology, physiology and
behaviour of organisms, but the impacts of noise pollution on survivorship are not clear.
We use juvenile coral reef fishes to examine the impact of outboard motorboat noise
on predator-prey interactions. Our previous studies have shown that boat noise from
2-stroke 30hp engines affect survival of juveniles through physiological stress and a
diminished startle response, leading to higher levels of predation. Here we show using a
field experiment that real boat noise alone does not have a detrimental effect on fish to
alter their survival. Boat noise did alter the way fish use the cues that indicate predation
risk. Laboratory exposure to boat noise playback prevented juvenile damselfish from
learning the identity of 3 common predators, such that they died 3x faster in the field
compared to fish who learnt predator identity under ambient reef sound. Field experiments also showed that the behaviour of juveniles exposed to continuous real boat noise
returned to a pre-exposure state after 20min. This may be due to damage of the acoustic
sensory apparatus or habituation. While juvenile damselfish may have the ability to
habituate to noise the detrimental short-term effects of boat noise through distraction


219

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

occasions, and foraminifera in the samples were identified to calculate relative species
abundances and FoRAM index (FI) values. Here, the benthic cover and foraminiferal
datasets are combined to provide insight on short and long-term effects of water quality
is not clearly related to the water quality gradient due to confounding stressors and historic catastrophic events. Coral cover has remained stable since 2008. However, changes
in the foraminiferal community are evident across the water quality gradient. Relative
abundance of symbiont-bearing foraminiferal species, most notably Amphistegina spp.,
and FI values are significantly related to water quality (p<0.05). FI values ranged from 5
near stream outputs to 9 at uninfluenced areas, and FI values declined at sites that were
resampled across years. The shorter life span of foraminifera causes the communities to
respond more rapidly to changes in water quality. Therefore, by paring coral and foraminifera monitoring, valuable information can be gained on short and long-term changes in
water quality conditions in Guam.

and physiological stress appear to dramatically influence mortality levels. This suggests
boat noise has the potential to markedly alter population replenishment and community
dynamics in busy waterways.

ESTIMATING NEARSHORE FISHERIES CATCH FOR THE MAIN HAWAIIAN
ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 28770)
Nearshore fisheries in the main Hawaiian Islands (MHI) have great economic, recreational, and cultural value. Currently, information on these fisheries is disparate and
incomplete, creating a challenge for effective management. This study combines and
synthesizes several commercial and small-scale non-commercial datasets to estimate
submitted by commercial fishers, a statewide recreational fisheries survey, and 12 smallscale, non-commercial creel surveys conducted at sites in Kauai, Oahu, Lanai, Maui, and
Hawaii. Results include an estimated range for total nearshore catch between 1,441,407
and 7,739,548 kg/yr., with the non-commercial catch between 9 and 53 times the
reported commercial reef fish catch. Additionally this study provides a comprehensive
overview of the MHI nearshore fishery, including best-available estimates of fishery data
such as catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE), gear-preference and participation rates, with data
broken out at island-scale. This is likely more appropriate for management purposes than


THE UNSEEN WORLD OF CORAL REEFS: BIODIVERSITY OF, AND HUMAN
IMPACTS ON, THE CORAL MICROBIOME (Abstract ID: 29661)
Recent studies have revealed that the composition of diverse and abundant reef-associated microbial communities may influence coral resistance to local and global stressors
currently threatening reefs worldwide. Combining benthic surveys, environmental data
and 16S rRNA gene sequencing ofMontipora foliosa, Porites lobata and overlaying reef
water, this research evaluates the relationship between reef-associated bacterial communities and coral resistance by monitoring these bacterial communities before and
during a thermal stress event at the island of Kiritimati, the world’s largest atoll. Kiritimati
pressure and nutrient runoff), with reefs highly degraded near the villages and becoming
near pristine at remote sites. We evaluate 1) how bacterial community structure is related
to individual coral colonies and overall coral community structure; and 2) how these
relationships are influenced by human disturbance and a thermal stress event. We have
data from 143 coral and water samples, focusing on two highly disturbed and two nearpristine sites. By quantifying coral reef microbial community composition and variability
across ecosystem components, coral species, a temporal scale and a gradient of human
disturbance, my research will provide new insights into microbial community ecology
and the role of microbes in reef resistance to disturbance.



HOW CORALS CONTROL CALCIFICATION IN A HIGH CO2 WORLD (Abstract ID:
28616)

DESIGNING AND FINANCING OPTIMAL ENFORCEMENT FOR SMALL-SCALE
FISHERIES AND DIVE TOURISM INDUSTRIES (Abstract ID: 29740 | Poster ID: 562)

Scleractinian corals have been spectacularly successful in building the calcium carbonate
coral-reef edifices that harbour a significant part of the oceans biodiversity. Their success can largely be attributed to their ability to biologically mediate the composition of
their calcifying-fluid and thereby increase the carbonate saturation state (Ω) to enhance
the kinetics of calcification. Manipulation of calcifying-fluid composition is thought to
occur via Ca-ATPase controlled up-regulation of pH and replenishment of DIC by still
poorly understood transport mechanisms. We have undertaken a global survey of both
zooxanthellate and azooxanthellate corals across tropical and cold-water environments. Boron isotopic and elemental systematics from their carbonate skeletons have
been used to determine calcifying-fluid pH, DIC and hence the Ω required to sustain
biomineralisation across these diverse environments. We find that zooxanthellate bearing
reef-building corals all have elevated pH (+0.3 to +0.5) above ambient seawater with the
azooxanthellate tropical coral Tubastreaexhibiting even higher pH up-regulation (+0.5
to +0.6 pH units), similar to that found in azooxanthellate cold-water corals. The DIC
characteristics are found to be systematically enriched (x1.5 to x2) relative to seawater
which together with higher pH gives significantly elevated Ω (14 to 20). Thus combined
up-regulation of pH, DIC and hence Ω in the calcifying fluid is a ubiquitous feature of
aragonitic corals and crucial to their ability to calcify in a high CO2 World.

Effective enforcement can reduce the impacts of illegal, unregulated, and unreported
(IUU) fishing, resulting in numerous economic, ecological, and social benefits. However,
resource managers in small-scale fisheries often lack the expertise and financial
resources required to design and implement an effective enforcement system. Here, a
bio-economic model is developed to investigate optimal levels of fishery enforcement
and financing mechanisms available to recover costs of enforcement. The model is
parameterized to represent a small-scale Caribbean lobster fishery, and optimal fishery
enforcement levels for three different stakeholder archetypes are considered: 1) a fishing
industry only; 2) a dive tourism industry only; and 3) fishing and dive tourism industries.
For the illustrative small-scale fishery presented, the optimal level of fishery enforcement
decreases with increasing levels of biomass, and is higher when a dive tourism industry
is present. Results also indicate that costs of fisheries enforcement can be recovered
through a suite of financing mechanisms. However, the time-scale over which financing
becomes sustainable will depend largely on the current status of the fishery resource.
This study may serve as a framework that can be used by resource managers to help
design and finance economically optimal fisheries enforcement systems.


BENTHIC FORAMINIFERA AND CORALS AS INDICATORS OF WATER QUALITY
IN WAR IN THE PACIFIC NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK, GUAM, USA (Abstract
ID: 28718)

MONITORING AND REPORTING ON REEF HEALTH AND MANAGEMENT IN
THE MESOAMERICAN REEF (Abstract ID: 29806)

Land-based sources of pollution threaten coral reefs, particularly in areas where streams
from poorly managed watersheds drain onto reefs. In Guam, two such reef areas
occur within War in the Pacific National Historical Park (WAPA). Since 2008, annual
benthic cover surveys have been conducted to monitor the state of coral reefs within

The Healthy Reefs for Healthy People Initiative (HRI) is a collaboration of 65 partner
organizations working to conserve the Mesoamerican Reef. HRI conducts biennial training courses and leads reef monitoring expeditions. There is an open access database

220

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

and annual meeting to discuss conservation priorities and issues within the region. Data
are used by partners for local management purposes and by HRI to produce popular
user-friendly Report Cards on the health of the reef. These reports are used by a variety
of stakeholders from top political officials to fishermen. They include reef management
recommendations which are evaluated for their degree of implementation in national
level and Eco-Audits. The 2015 Report Card surveyed 248 sites finding most reefs
remain in poor (40%) or fair (34%) condition. The number in critical condition (17%)
declined while the amount in good or very good remains 9%. Coral cover improved
since 2006, increasing from 10%-16% cover; although fleshy macroalgae also increased.
Key herbivorous fish continue to increase in numbers, and have been fully protected in
most of the region. Commercial fish have increased in biomass, although large groupers
are rare outside of the fully protected zones of marine reserves. The 2016 Eco-Audit
measured increased implementation of management actions, with improvements in 27
recommended management actions. This adaptive management framework allows for
collaborative monitoring and management at a variety of spatial scales and has become
a valuable tool for catalyzing public awareness and reef management actions.

FUNCTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF SYMBIONT DIVERSITY WITHIN A CORALALGAL ASSOCIATION (Abstract ID: 29449)
Research on various host-symbiont study systems has now recognized the importance
of the diversity and organization of symbiotic species to mutualism function. The octocoral Briareum asbestinum, benefits from associations with endosymbiotic algae of the
genus Symbiodinium for nutrient acquisition on oligotrophic reefs. Using stable isotope
tracers of H13CO3- and 15NO3- we examined the nutritional quality of single species
and mixed species symbiont assemblages. We found that the relative abundance of two
the acquisition rate of carbon and nitrogen by the symbionts and the translocation of
those nutrients to the host. Our results demonstrated physiological differences between
symbiont species with some evidence of competitive interactions among symbionts
and/or host regulation of nutrient supply within mixed species Symbiodinium assemblages. However, complex ecological interactions among symbionts and between the
host and symbionts were difficult to tease apart.



IN SITU METABOLISM, SOLAR HEATING, AND CONVECTIVE COOLING OF
CORALS IN REEF ENVIRONMENTS (Abstract ID: 30002)
Incident bottom solar radiation is a source of significant heat energy to the benthos that
must be either dissipated or stored. The dissipation and storage of this radiative heat
has been shown to be a function of coral radiative properties, coral physical properties, and bottom mixing. Since coral surfaces heat and cool when there are changes in
water temperature, coral substrate temperatures require time to thermally acclimatize.
We used BEAMS (Benthic Ecosystem Acidification and Metabolism System) boundary
layer measurements to quantify metabolism and measure both the radiative forcing (>
100 W/m2) and convective heating/cooling of corals at Palmyra Atoll (Line Islands)
and Panama/Galapagos (eastern tropical Pacific) in 2014. This allowed us to investigate,
for the first time, the diurnal cycle of metabolism and heat exchange and their potential
impacts on coral reef systems. Since temperature is a critical control on the metabolism
and bleaching response of corals, interactions between these physical parameters can
have significant implications for coral health.

ASSESSING RELATIVE RESILIENCE POTENTIAL OF CORAL REEFS TO INFORM
MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 27911)
Ecological resilience assessments are an important part of resilience-based management
(RBM) and can help prioritize and target management actions. Use of such assessments has been limited due to a lack of clear guidance on the assessment process. We
provide that guidance from a resilience assessment undertaken in the Commonwealth
of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI). We assessed spatial variation in ecological
resilience potential at 78 forereef sites near the populated islands of the CNMI: Saipan,
Tinian/Aguijan, and Rota. The assessment was based on measuring indicators of
resilience processes and was combined with information on anthropogenic stress and
larval connectivity. We found great spatial variation in relative resilience potential with
many high resilience sites near Saipan (5 of 7) and low resilience sites near Rota (7 of
9). Criteria were developed to identify priority sites for six types of management actions
and enforcement) and 51 of the 78 sites met at least one of the sets of criteria. The connectivity simulations developed indicate Tinian/Aguijan are each roughly 10x the larvae
source that Rota is and twice as frequent a destination. These results may explain the
lower relative resilience potential of Rota reefs and indicates actions in Saipan and Tinian/Aguijan will be important to maintaining supply of larvae. The process we describe
for undertaking resilience assessments can be tailored for use in coral reef areas globally
and applied to other ecosystems.


INTEGRATING TELEMETRY-DERIVED DATA INTO SPATIAL DECISION-MAKING
AND PRIORITIZATION FRAMEWORKS (Abstract ID: 29086)
Spatial planning strategies for conserving mobile marine species primarily focus on the
protection of nesting or breeding sites and predictable coastal foraging habitats. Yet,
conservation of these areas alone does not protect the migratory life stages, where
many threatened mobile species continue to face population declines and mortality at
sea. Although some protection of pelagic and key foraging habitats occurs incidentally,
most pelagic pathways where species experience incidental mortality from artisanal
fishing, commercial bycatch or targeted consumption remain exposed. We address
this conservation deficiency by developing novel, quantative methods to incorporate
telemetry and tracking data into conservation planning approaches. Our case studies illustrate how conservation planners can translate spatiotemporal variability in individuals
movements into quantitative spatial planning objectives for highly mobile marine species.
We investigate optimal spatial management strategies for pelagic protected areas (static/
seasonal closures and gear modification zones) that minimize the probability of mobile
species bycatch occuring across all taxa. Combining individual movement data with at
sea threats from artisanal and commercial fishing, we identify areas and conservation
actions that reduce the likelihoods of mortality from anthropogenic pressures.


ESTABLISHING INDICATORS FOR A REPORT CARD IN A COMPLEX MARINE
Marine environmental report cards are an increasingly popular tool to communicate
scientific results to stakeholders and communities. The challenge in developing a report
card for complex marine habitats where changes in abundance, cover, distribution and
221

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

The work of the 1973 Royal Society and Universities of Queensland Expedition lead
by David Stoddart shed new light on the history and morphological development of the
northern Great Barrier Reef system. Evidence from shallow coring, surface geomorphology, lithology of exposed limestone rocks, superficial sediment accumulations,
vegetation patterns and the historical record of sea level derived from radiometric dating
suggested a sequence of reef and island development in Holocene times. An assessment of the results of the expedition over forty years on reveals some of the conclusions
made subtle incremental advances to our comparative knowledge of reefs and reef
islands as well as providing a robust launch-pad for others. But the tightly constrained
Holocene sea level history provided the strongest demonstration to date that there were
regional differences in sea level and not just one global eustatic story; that has been the
expeditions most lasting legacy.

species can occur is establishing appropriate indicators to evaluate habitat condition. We
developed an innovative approach for reporting on the condition of seagrasses as part
of a broader report card on the environmental, social, cultural and economic health of
one of Australia’s largest multi-commodity ports located in the Great Barrier Reef World
Heritage Area. The process used expert opinion to determine the best indicators of
seagrass condition (above-ground biomass, meadow area, species composition), trialled
four approaches to determine a baseline condition of each indicator, and defined five
condition categories (very good - very poor) to grade each seagrass meadow relative to
a baseline. Threshold levels for each condition category were determined based on the
historical variability of each indicator in a meadow. The report card approach allowed
for the presentation of a large amount of spatial information, including the location,
condition, and the reason for each meadow’s grade to be presented within a single map.
This allowed not only for rapid comparison of seagrass condition across the range of
meadows within the port, but also at a broader regional scale.



CHALLENGES AND GUIDANCE INTEGRATING CLIMATE CHANGE INTO
CORAL REEF PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 28890)
Coral reef ecosystems, including the communities that depend upon them, are particularly vulnerable to climate change. However, reef managers and conservation planners
face a number of challenges integrating potential climate change impacts into their
conservation strategies. They may lack access to climate model data, or the data may
be too coarse for site-based planning. Uncertainties in climate data and outputs make it
challenging to interpret and apply in conservation decisions. Guidance is needed on how
to identify the most appropriate tools and outputs for assessing climate impacts, and
how to apply climate projection data to decision support frameworks including how to
weight these data alongside other social and ecological factors. This session will outline
these challenges and explore how they are being addressed through the Reef Resilience
Network. The Network provides reef managers and practitioners with access to the
latest science and management tools, strategies, and recommendations to incorporate
climate change and others stressors into coral reef planning and management. A webbased toolkit includes an overview of climate stressors and projections, guidance for
managing such stressors including case studies, and best practices addressing social and
ecological resilience.

SURVEY OF HAWAIIAN CORAL PHYSIOLOGY ACROSS A NATURAL RANGE OF
TEMPERATURE AND PH GRADIENTS (Abstract ID: 29723 | Poster ID: 405)
Coral reefs worldwide are threatened due to ocean acidification and increasing seawater
temperatures, yet the potential for coral to adapt or acclimatize to global change is
poorly understood. Kaneohe Bay, Oahu, Hawaii, is an unusual reef location in that it
currently experiences temperatures and pCO2 concentrations not expected to occur on
most Hawaiian reefs for another 30-50 years. We hypothesize that coral located in this
reef have adapted to the above average conditions, and possess certain physiological
and biogeochemical traits that facilitate this resilience. Four of the most dominant coral
species (Montipora capitata, Porites compressa, Porites lobata and Pocillopora meandrina)
from across the Hawaiian archipelago were surveyed from various different locations.
These locations span the natural physical gradient in coral species distribution in Hawaii,
and exhibit seasonal pH and temperature profiles that span conditions representative of
today, through those predicted for 2050. We analyzed chlorophyll a concentration and
to determine if there is a link between variation in other physiological traits (lipid, protein
and carbohydrate content) and variation in physical regimes among sites. These findings
will further our understanding of which traits underlie coral resilience and/or adaptation
capacity to future ocean condition on coral reefs.


ONTOGENETIC MIGRATION OF SNAPPER LINKS FOOD WEBS ACROSS A
Many socio-ecologically important coral reef fishes undergo impressive ontogenetic
migrations across tropical seascapes, linking distant habitats, populations, and food
webs. We examined ontogenetic migration patterns of Ehrenberg’s Snapper (Lutjanus
ehrenbergii) populations on coastal and oceanic coral reefs in the Red Sea using a new
otolith-based compound-specific stable isotope method. We then applied a new amino
acid isotope fingerprinting approach within a Bayesian mixing model framework to
identify the sources of primary producers (phytoplankton, coral, macroalgae, seagrass,
and mangroves) fueling the local snapper populations during different stages of their
ontogenetic migration. We found that seascape configuration played a critical role in
reefs often relied heavily on a seagrass-based food web as juveniles before switching to
a macroalgal-based food web once they migrated out to the adult population on shelf
ontogenetic change in either habitat or baseline carbon source, relying heavily on a water
column phytoplankton-based food web throughout their lives. Our work provides insights
into the roles that ontogenetic migration plays in linking essential habitats and food webs
across tropical seascapes.


LINKING PATTERNS AND PROCESSES WITH SHIFTING BASELINES ON CORAL
REEFS (Abstract ID: 27969)
Understanding how and why coral-reefs have changed in the last twenty to thirty years
is crucial to sustaining coral-reef resilience. This is especially relevant for small-island
nations that depend heavily on their marine resources, such as Kosrae, Federated States
of Micronesia. We used a unique historical baseline to examine how Kosrae’s coral and
fish assemblages have shifted since 1986, and identify potential drivers of change. Key
findings were that natural gradients in both fish and coral assemblages with wave exposure and watersheds have become amplified over that past three decades, as species are
now more geographically restricted and metapopulation connectivity is reduced. Fishing
access best predicted declining fish assemblage condition through time, and in turn,
declining fish assemblages were correlated with negative changes to coral assemblages.
This was especially pronounced on the leeward side of the island. A pollution proxy was
further identified as a predictor of coral assemblage condition, but only in the modern
time frame, and only in a few densely populated watersheds. Because large-scale
disturbances have been minimal in Kosrae, declining coral condition was likely caused
by the accumulation of small-scale disturbances through time, whereby compromised
ecosystem resilience would have impeded coral recovery. Improving reef health on
small islands like Kosrae will require prioritized management policies focused on local
stressors, like over-fishing, that damage ecological resilience.


RECENT DAMAGE TO OFFSHORE CORAL REEFS IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA:
QUANTIFICATION, IMPLICATIONS AND POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS (Abstract ID:
28225)
The offshore reefs of the South China Sea may be important in preventing extirpation
of overharvested species throughout the region. Overlapping jurisdictional claims by
bordering nations have led to actions, including military base construction, intended to
support these claims. This has resulted in unprecedented rates of essentially permanent
coral reef decline due to island building and reinforcement. Channel and harbor dredging
has permanently altered important reef processes. Additionally, the widespread dredging of materials for the island construction activities has led to damage of decadal or


222

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Reef, Florida Keys, with a 40% increase in volume (approx. 2 liters of sponge tissue per
square meter). Barrel sponges are estimated to overturn the water column every 2-18
days, and selectively feed on bacteria and other picoplankton, but have a diet that is
mostly (~70%) made up of dissolved organic carbon (DOC). Using demographic data
from 2000-2012, and measurements of filtration rates of particulates and DOC, we
demographic mechanisms that change benthic-pelagic coupling. Population-mediated
carbon flux increased over time with increasing sponge density and volume, with the
largest individuals making the greatest contribution. Elasticity analysis revealed that the
growth of sponges in all stages, the survival of sponges in the two largest stages, and the
production of new recruits by the largest sponges had the greatest influence on changes
in carbon flux. Projections indicated that population-mediated carbon flux will continue
in the transfer of carbon from the water column to the benthos on Caribbean coral reefs.

longer time scales. The total area damaged, in conjunction with the growing levels of
over-harvesting, may be enough to substantially impact regional fisheries production
and destabilize populations of many species. Consequent hardships may lead to more
pressure to strengthen claims, resulting in an intensifying spiral of ecological degradation and political tension. A potential means to halt this spiral is to institute a renewable
multilateral treaty consisting of a freeze on claims, a freeze on claim-supportive activities,
and a joint plan for resource management. One embodiment of such as plan would be a
Greater Spratly Islands Peace Park.


LARVAL DISPERSAL AS A MECHANISM FOR CORAL PERSISTENCE ON REEF
COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 29852)
Connectivity through larval dispersal is thought to be a major determinant of coral
persistence, especially in terms of the recovery potential for populations that suffer
catastrophic mass bleaching events. However, our understanding of the interactions between coral recruitment and mortality on reefs is limited, particularly when reproduction
occurs in a discrete, seasonal manner as in most stony coral species in the Indo-Pacific.
Here, we model coral-algal competition on a reef patch, accounting for larval input from
within the patch and an external source. We incorporate coral recruitment in two ways,
with larvae arriving either seasonally or continuously through time. Our goals were to
(1) determine the conditions under which connectivity can offset the effects of higher
mortality due to bleaching and (2) evaluate the impact of recruitment and mortality on
the stability of coral- vs. algal-dominated regimes. In general, incorporating coral recruitment, even seasonally, erodes the basin of attraction associated with algal-dominated
states. This allows coral to persist in a parameter space that, without larval input, would
lead to algal dominance. When coral cover is low, there exists a threshold number of
arriving larvae to a patch that will stimulate coral recovery; this threshold depends on
the initial algal cover. If algal cover is beyond a critical level, however, no amount of
larval input can induce a shift to coral dominance. In this case, there is an increase in the
importance of within-patch processes in setting the trajectory towards a particular reef
state.

MULTIFACETED IMPACTS OF THE STONEY CORAL PORITES ASTREOIDES ON
PICOPLANKTON ABUNDANCE AND COMMUNITY COMPOSITION (Abstract ID:
28084 | Poster ID: 146)
Picoplankton foster the essential recycling of substrates in the oligotrophic waters
sustaining coral reef ecosystems. However, how specific interactions between corals
and planktonic bacteria and archaea (picoplankton) contribute to reef productivity are
not well resolved. Here, we utilized mesocosm experiments to investigate how corals
and coral mucus influence picoplankton and nutrient dynamics in reef waters. Over
12 days, we tracked nutrient concentrations, picoplankton abundances and taxonomic
composition of picoplankton using direct cell-counts, sequencing of SSU rRNA genes
and fluorescent in situ hybridization-based abundances of dominant lineages in the
presence or absence of Porites astreoides corals or their mucus. Our results demonstrate
that when corals are present, Synechococcus , SAR11 and Rhodobacteraceae cells are
preferentially removed and Alteromonadaceae and Oxalobacteraceae cells increase in
abundance. When corals were absent, their exudates enhanced the growth of diverse
picoplankton, including SAR11 and Rhodobacteraceae. A ten-fold increase in nitrate
concentration, apparently caused by nitrogen remineralization within the coral, may have
further facilitated the growth of these taxa. In contrast, the addition of mucus resulted
in inconsistent responses by the picoplankton community. This study presents evidence
of the multifaceted influences of corals on picoplankton, in which the coral holobiont
selectively removes and promotes the growth of diverse picoplankton and remineralizes
nitrogen, thereby fostering reef productivity.


SEARCHING FOR CODIVERGENCE AMONG CORALS AND BACTERIA WITH
THE GLOBAL CORAL MICROBIOME PROJECT (Abstract ID: 28101)


INDUSTRY AND RESEARCH COLLABORATION TO LEVERAGE CORAL REEF
SCIENCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
(Abstract ID: 28142)

It has been previously demonstrated that microbial communities associated with coral
animals display patterns of host species-specificity. We hypothesized that important
members of the coral microbiome have codiversified with their hosts, that these members can be detected among a large community of associates, and that the degree of
their codivergence will vary among coral groups depending on certain life-history traits
such as reproductive method. As part of the Global Coral Microbiome Project (GCMP),
we have systematically sampled more than 1500 healthy individuals from ~130 species
of corals in ~20 Scleractinian families, plus anthozoan and hydrozoan ‘outgroups’, and
abiotic controls. We have separately extracted DNA from the mucus, tissue, and skeleton
of each of these samples, and have used high-throughput sequencing of the 16S marker
gene to assess bacterial community composition. We have begun to test our hypotheses
by applying novel bioinformatic techniques. Preliminary data suggest that at least one
bacterial taxon, Endozoicomonas sp., is distributed in a manner consistent with coevolution on large timescales. We have also contrasted the variance in microbial communities
explainable by sampling location and host phylogeny, finding distinctive patterns in each.
The data generated by this project are freely available to the community, providing a
large resource to which future data can be compared.

Woodside Energy Ltd and the Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS) enter a
new working partnership in 2016 based on over twenty years of collaborative scientific
studies supported by various funding models. The studies have underpinned impact assessment for upstream oil and gas activities and proposed developments in the offshore
waters of Western Australia. This showcase includes: one of the world’s key long-term
monitoring programs of a remote oceanic reef system including mesotrophic coral
communities, seismic survey potential impacts, updated baseline for the World Heritage
Areas of Ningaloo Reef and Shark Bay and the repurposing of industry acquired geophysical data for habitat mapping to support environmental risk assessment.


GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE SOUNDSCAPES: LIZARD ISLAND - A CORAL
REEF CASE STUDY (Abstract ID: 29200)
Marine soundscapes are acquiring a growing level of social and academic awareness.
Advancements in technology and ecological modelling now provide opportunities to
progress research and monitoring programs, but large knowledge gaps remain in the
following key areas: soundscape spatio-temporal patterns, methodology and soundsource identification. This presentation provides a synopsis of Lizard Island marine
soundscapes. Great Barrier Reef marine soundscapes have received limited coverage,
making this a rare and important study. Sets of continuous sound recordings were

CARBON-CYCLING ON CARIBBEAN CORAL REEFS: THE INCREASING ROLE OF
GIANT BARREL SPONGES (Abstract ID: 28192)
Benthic suspension feeders support a number of ecosystem processes, including benthic-pelagic coupling and the cycling of carbon and nutrients. Sponges now
dominate Caribbean reefs, with the giant barrel spongeXestospongia muta playing the
largest role. Barrel sponge populations increased by 122% for 2000-2012 on Conch

223

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

particularly about coral reefs; field trips to two relevant coral reefs in the Pacific and
Caribbean to produce coverage that was published in 12 press and TV notes; several talks
to students and general public in different cities; and a colorful booklet with information
about coral reefs. Most of the products can be found in the Mexican Coral Reef Society
com/arrecifes-coralinos-somac). The information and products include valid information
that can be use for some years, increasing the chances to reach more people and improving the knowledge on coral reefs, which can help in their protection and conservation.

collected at field sites across a number of seasons (2014-2016). Several prominent fish
choruses were identified at specific locations around the island, exhibiting a range of different temporal patterns. Cyclone Nathan hit Lizard in March 2015 causing widespread
damage to the Island’s coral reef. A comparison of reef soundscapes prior and one year
post-cyclone will be presented. Simultaneously measuring environmental co-variables
at a site level is an important step in identifying soundscape contributors and explaining
observed patterns. Environmental co-variables, wind speed, temperature and relative
light levels were collected at field sites on a 10 minute duty-cycle. Additional information
on salinity, pH and tide height was obtained from open-access oceanographic datasets.
The influence of ship-radiated broadband noise from a nearby commercial shipping lane
had a significant influence on the underlying soundscape. Masking of fish choruses up to
several hours was common in the presence of passing ships.



CORAL TRAIT DIVERSITY AND FUNCTIONAL COLLAPSE ON CARIBBEAN
CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 27900)

LEARNING NETWORKS AS A POWERFUL TOOL FOR INCREASING EFFECTIVENESS OF CORAL REEF CONSERVATION (Abstract ID: 30116)

To explain patterns of shifting function in coral assemblages, we must consider how species
differ in their contribution to ecosystem processes, and how they respond to local and global
stress. Here, we use a multi-trait analysis to measure the relative contribution of Caribbean
corals to numerous reef-level processes, such as reef accretion, primary productivity, and
habitat provision. We identify coral functional types (CFT’s) in the Caribbean, allowing us to
explicitly measure functional diversity and redundancy in coral communities. By analysing
the abundance of corals during multi-decadal shifts in community structure, we show that
in Jamaica, coral species of similar functional type exhibit similar responses to disturbance (low response diversity), such as hurricanes and bleaching events. This, along with
unprecedented stress from the loss of herbivores, has led to regime shifts, whereby all corals,
and coral functions have been lost. Low response diversity is also evident on degraded
reefs that are recovering, resulting in alternate coral assemblages, with substantially different
biogeochemical, trophic and constructional processes. This study asserts that the stability
of function in ecosystems is largely a product of the association between ‘response’ and
‘contribution’ traits in critical groups of organisms.

Collaborative management and adaptive learning are some of the most effective and
powerful ways to engage stakeholders to improve local management at the site level. Especially in the marine realm, where coastal areas and reef ecosystems are in the public
domain, a particpatory and community-based approach is necessary. Inspired by the
Locally Managed Marine Area (LMMA) Network, The Maui Nui Makai Area Learning
Network was established in 2013 by 6 communities from Maui, Lanai and Molokai and
2 supporting organizations. This emerging network would like to share their experiences
and lessons learned on how to form networks that build capacity for communities that
rely on the health of their marine and coastal environments. Success stories and challenges with community outreach, engagement, co-management, governance, developing
appropriate bio-cultural indicators and traditional knowledge will be discussed and
shared by community leaders from the Maui Nui Makai Network to provide examples
of how scientists and reef managers can better engage and support communities in
improving coral reef conservation and fisheries management.



SPECTRAL SIGNATURES OF BRAZILIAN CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 29664)

THE COMMUNITY WATERSHED SNAPSHOT: LOCAL MEASURES OF AHUPUA‘A
HEALTH (Abstract ID: 30043 | Poster ID: 571)

Studies involving spectral signatures are important as they provide a base for the
interpretation of data obtained through remote sensing at different levels, allowing better
mapping and environmental monitoring. An investigation of the spectral signatures of
Brazilian corals and hydrocoral includes as selected species Agaricia agaricites, Favia
gravida, Mussismilia braziliensis, Mussismilia harttii, Milepora alcicornis, Porites astreoides and Siderastrea stellata. Spectral signatures were collected using a portable FieldSpec 3 Hi-Res spectroradiometer and subsequently processed using two techniques:
mean and derivative analysis, using the first and the fourth derivates. Results classify the
the brown spectral group. Features in the first derivate are used to distinguish some of
the species, while the fourth derivate presents positive and negative peaks that confirm
the differences among species observed in the first derivate. Possibly, fluorescent or
non-fluorescent pigments present in the tissue of corals were responsible for the differences in spectral signatures. Thus, apparently, it will be possible to distinguish some coral
species through their spectral signatures using data about the different fluorescent and/
or non-fluorescent pigments present in corals tissue. The final objective is to use these
spectral signatures to classify WorldView-2 satellite imagery into coral cover maps.

Hawaii Conservation Alliance’s (HCA) Community Watershed Snapshot is a status
report on the health of our watersheds produced from geospatial data gathered by the
community. This initiative is the first community-based conservation effort of HCA,
under the Effective Conservation Program (ECP). The ECP’s goal is to facilitate effective
conservation of Hawai’i’s native ecosystems in terrestrial, aquatic, and marine realms by
measuring and maximizing effectiveness, strategic planning, and success of the collective conservation community through active management, protective designation, and
stakeholder support for a stable track record of expanding biodiversity. In 2013, HCA
consulted with local leaders and stakeholders from eight communities across the main
Hawaiian Islands on how best to measure the health of local watersheds. Community
representatives identified a set of mauka (terrestrial), makai/wai (ocean/fresh water),
and na’ike (social-economic) factors that they believe are important in understanding
the status (“snapshot”) of the health of their ahupua’a. Following formal review and
consideration by HCA members, a set of Watershed Snapshot Metrics was endorsed by
HCA in 2014. During 2015 and 2016, volunteer communities have begun to implement
the watershed snapshot measures. Participating communities aim to use the information gathered through the watershed snapshot measures to inform and advance their
community-based natural resource management efforts.


COMMUNICATING THE SCIENCE OF THE MEXICAN CORAL REEFS TO SUPPORT THEIR PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION (Abstract ID: 28727)


Mexico is a privileged country thanks to its location in the tropics and having coastlines
on two oceans, where coral reefs and their associated organisms develop, having a direct
and indirect impact on the use of resources that sustain national economy. However, it
is remarkable the ignorance that the general public has on organisms and phenomena
associated with these ecosystems. The purpose of the project was to improve the awareness in the society about the current situation of the Mexican coral reefs and the studies
that students and scientists are producing and publishing. Results included products
aiming several groups of people: two types of radio spots; an updated web site to support
students and scientists interested on coral reefs, but also complemented with information
for the general public; workshops on science journalism focused on scientific meetings,

HUMANS AND SEASONAL CLIMATE VARIABILITY THREATEN LARGE-BODIED
CORAL REEF FISH WITH SMALL RANGES (Abstract ID: 27844 | Poster ID: 422)
Coral reefs are among the most species-rich and threatened ecosystems on Earth, yet
the extent to which human stressors determine species occurrences, compared to biogeography or environmental conditions, remains largely unknown over broad spatial scales.

224

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

performed. Here, we describe the global distributional patterns of herbivorous fishes
on tropical reefs, and the relative importance of their main feeding modes according to
large-scale biogeographical variables. We compiled a database on the occurrence of 550
herbivorous fish species at 170 sites worldwide. Each species was classified according to
six functional traits and functional entities (FEs) defined as a combination of each one
of these traits. We found markedly differences on richness and proportion of herbivores
among region, with higher values in the Indo-Pacific (IP), in contrast with Eastern Pacific
(EP) and Atlantic. The functional structure of the herbivore assemblages presented a
similar pattern with functional richness positively related to richness. Browsers exhibited
higher proportions in EP and Atlantic and peripheral areas of the IP, and scrapers were
fishes assemblages. Patterns of functional structure observed may have important
implications for coral reef conservation and management.

With ever-increasing human-mediated disturbances on these ecosystems, an important
question is not only how many species can inhabit local communities, but also which
biological traits determine species that can persist (or not) above particular disturbance
thresholds. Here we show that human pressure and seasonal climate variability are
disproportionately and negatively associated with the occurrence of large-bodied and
geographically small-ranging fishes within local coral reef communities. These species
are 67 % less likely to occur where human impact and temperature seasonality exceed
critical thresholds, such as in the marine biodiversity hotspot: the Coral Triangle. Our
results identify the most sensitive species and critical thresholds of human and climatic
stressors, providing opportunity for targeted conservation intervention to prevent local
extinctions.


IMPORTANCE OF HETEROTROPHIC FEEDING FOR PORITES CYLINDRICA AS

TEMPORAL VARIATIONS IN PHOTOCHEMICAL EFFICIENCIES OF ALGAL SYMBIONTS IN BENTHIC FORAMINIFERA AND ANTHOZOANS IN THE FLORIDA
KEYS (Abstract ID: 29391 | Poster ID: 286)

Emissions of anthropogenic carbon dioxide have been increasing both the temperature
and acidity of the oceans and consequently challenging the future of many calcifying
marine organisms such as corals. High diversity of corals and their varying response
to climatic change, make understating future changes important. Previous research
suggests Porites cylindrica can survive several months longer than other species in a
cylindricasurvive and grow in the absence of autotrophic energy. Unbleached and heat
bleached corals where kept under four different feeding treatments (particulate or dissolved organic carbon, glucose and not fed) and two light regimes (light/dark or dark
only). Coral survival was the same across all treatments, however some bleached corals
maintained in the dark showed signs of disease. Different food groups had no significant
effect on calcification rates measured as changes in buoyant rate. An interaction between
light and coral bleaching status was observed with only unbleached corals exposed to
light/dark cycles showing significant calcification over the 14-day experimental period.
for tissue growth in the presence of food when photoassimilates are absent. The results
obtained to date consistent with the hypothesis that the promotion of coral calcification
by dinoflagellates is not solely based on the provision of energy to the host.

Pulse-amplitude modulated (PAM) fluorometry is widely used to study photochemical efficiency in photosynthetic organisms. This project compared photochemical
efficiencies of the algal symbionts of reef organisms by time of year and habitat depth.
Maximum quantum yields (Fv/Fm) were measured from visibly healthy colonies of
three species of zooxanthellate anthozoans (in situ) and specimens of the foraminiferAmphistegina gibbosa, which hosts diatoms. Because of their small sizes, data for the
latter were taken in the laboratory as soon as possible after field collection. Field work
was carried out near the equinoxes and solstices in 2012-13 at Tennessee Reef, Florida,
USA, at 6 m and 18 m depths. At 6 m, the Fv/Fm means for Palythoa caribaeorum differed only between summer (0.55 +/- 0.01) and fall (0.63 +/- 0.01) 2012. No significant
differences with time were found for Siderastrea siderea at 6 m (0.64 +/- 0.01). The mean
in spring 2013 (0.65 +/- 0.01). No significant differences were found forMontastraea
(0.719 +/- 0.01) were lower than their counterparts at 18 m (0.735 +/- 0.01). The overall
variable yields under higher potential for photic stress, that is, both shallower depths and
months with highest solar irradiance.


PETER MINSHALL’S WATER COLOURS: AN INNOVATIVE APPROACH TO CORAL
REEF CONSERVATION AND CONSERVATION FINANCING IN TOBAGO (Abstract
ID: 28740)


The Buccoo Reef Marine Park (7km2 of coral reefs, seagrass and mangroves) is Tobago’s biggest tourist attraction, earning an estimated US$43.5 million (40% of the island’s
tourism income) annually. It was designated as a protected area in 1973; a RAMSAR
site in 2005; and an Environmentally Sensitive Area under Trinidad’s 2001 Environmentally Sensitive Area Rules. As legal protection has increased mean live coral cover
has decreased, with the greatest decline in shallow water (<3m), from 23.20% in 1985
to 5.63% in 2009. Lack of funds to manage the Park has contributed to these declines.
Government funding for the Park was just US$56,000 in 2009. A 2010 willingness-to-pay
study suggested that US$11.72 could be charged to visit the reefs. However, charging
Pigeon Point, the Park’s beach, led to protests and the fatal shooting of a fisherman in
2000). In an effort to independently and sustainably finance the Park, Trinidadian Carnival Artist Peter Minshall, creator of the Opening Ceremonies for the Barcelona, Atlanta,
and Salt Lake City Olympics, is making Water Colours—an undersea artwork at Buccoo.
This new, culturally-appropriate tourist attraction will raise funds through admission fees
and memorabilia sales. This paper describes the IADB-funded first phase of the project
including: the design of the sculptures; the creation of the Water Colours Trust Fund;
and the socio-economic and marketing studies for the attraction.

GENETIC DIVERSITY OF THE SYMBIOTIC DINOFLAGELLATES (SYMBIODINIUM) ON THE CORAL PORITES PANAMENSIS IN THE EASTERN TROPICAL
PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 29521)
The reef-building corals have a symbiotic relationship with dinoflagellates of the
genus Symbiodinium. This symbiosis involves many interactions processes that lead
to genetic changes and adaptations. In this study, we describe the genetic diversity of
the endosymbiotic dinoflagellates (Symbiodinium) within the coral Porites panamensis in
the Eastern Tropical Pacific. The genetic diversity of symbiont was accesed using the
Gulf of California, West coast of Mexico and Costa Rica. We found four phylogenetic
lineages (L1-L4) belonging to Symbiodinium Clade C in the Eastern Tropical Pacific. The
lineage 1 was composed by six groups distributed in the Gulf of California. We show that
haplotypes in 39 sequences analyzed. Changing environmental conditions across the
Eastern Tropical Pacific have led to the existence of distinct symbiont-host combinations. This environmental situation combined with the reproductive form of the coral
genetic diversity ofSymbiodinium in Porites panamensis. This could be an explanation of
how the host and its symbionts have diverged in many different phylogenetic groups that
belong to distinct localities across the Eastern Tropical Pacific.


FUNCTIONAL BIOGEOGRAPHY OF NOMINALLY HERBIVOROUS FISHES
(Abstract ID: 28649)
Herbivorous fishes are known to be important components of reef systems worldwide,
but to date no comprehensive large-scale study of their functional structure has been

225

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM



OPTICAL PROPERTIES INVOLVED IN THE EFFICIENCY OF LIGHT ABSORPTION OF CORAL FAVIA FRAGUM (Abstract ID: 29732 | Poster ID: 45)

THE IMPORTANCE OF LONG-TERM MONITORING TO ASSESS THE EFFECTIVENESS OF SEAGRASS BEDS WITHIN A MARINE PROTECTED AREAS
NETWORK IN PALAU, MICRONESIA (Abstract ID: 28580 | Poster ID: 555)

The structural complexity of corals provides them the capacity to regulate the amount
of light they receive, by absorbing a variable fraction of the photons and transmitting,
reflecting or scattering the rest. The aim of this study was to describe the optical properties of Favia fragum at two developmental stages with different skeletal thicknesses: 35
juveniles with skeletal thicknesses less than 0.5 cm and 25 adult colonies with skeletal
thicknesses greater than 1 cm were used. Measurements of transmittance and reflectance were performed and from these measures absorbances and absorptances were
estimated. The number of symbionts, their chlorophyll a content and the chlorophyll a
specific absorption coefficients (a*) were determined. The transmittance value recorded
in the skeletons of juveniles was close to 3%. Reflectances at 675 nm was 12% in adult
colonies and 37% for the juveniles with absorptance values of 88% and 62% respectively. Juveniles had a higher pigment content/symbiont and lower symbiont densities than
adults. Comparison of a* values showed that adults are up to 1.6 times more efficient at
absorbing light than juveniles. Loss of light by transmittance is reduced with increasing
skeletal thickness and is related to the increased light absorption efficiency in adult colonies. The balance between cell density and symbiotic photosynthetic pigments strongly
influence the efficiency of light absorption in corals with different skeletal thicknesses.

Seagrass beds provide a number of ecosystem goods and services which include
nursery grounds, habitat for fish, carbon sequestration, sediment trapping, and nutrient
filtration. The loss of seagrass beds often leads to a decrease in fish and invertebrates’
populations, increase in sedimentation, and impacts adjacent coral reefs. In Palau,
several seagrass beds are protected and are part of the Palau Protected Areas Network
(PAN) that aims at effectively conserve marine resources. However, since the implementation of the PAN, few studies have looked at the impacts of protection on seagrass bed
communities. With long term monitoring data collected bi-annually since 2011 on fish,
invertebrates and seagrass communities, this study showed the effect of protection at
four spatially spread seagrass beds. Results demonstrated that protected seagrass beds
had higher marine resources than their respective non-protected reference sites. In addition, fish and invertebrates densities and seagrass cover within MPAs showed different
trends among the four MPAs. This implies that protection from fishing solely is benefiting
seagrass beds but to a certain extent. Other non-measured variables such as water quality should be considered in the future for more effective resource management.



EVALUATING THE CONTRIBUTION OF HOST GENOTYPE, SYMBIODINIUM
COMMUNITY, AND BLEACHING HISTORY IN REPEATEDLY BLEACHED ACROPORA CERVICORNIS NURSERIES (Abstract ID: 29840)

A PHYLOGEOGRAPHIC APPROACH TO STUDY CORAL REEF REFUGES IN
SOUTHWEST ATLANTIC (Abstract ID: 29031 | Poster ID: 68)

Symbiodinium community composition, host genotype, and bleaching history play key
roles in determining holobiont thermal tolerance and bleaching susceptibility. The hyperthermal events in both summers of 2014 and 2015 severely affected Acropora cervicornis
propogated within South Florida coral nurseries and provided an opportunity to study
these factors. These nurseries rigorously track numerous different clones or genets, each
containing many clonal individuals or ramets, allowing for study of diverse genotypes.
Bi-monthly to monthly sampling of these corals from June 2014 prior to thermal stress
through September 2015 tracked these corals through both mass bleaching events.
High throughput sequencing has begun to revolutionize the study of coral associated
Symbiodinium communities, but it has not yet been applied to temporal studies of coral
bleaching recovery, when Symbiodinium communities are most dynamic. We employed
high-resolution pair-end Illumina sequencing to track Symbiodiniumcommunities using
the cp23S rDNA through time points before, during, and after the bleaching events. Our
study evaluates the roles of coral host genotype, Symbiodinium community composition,
and bleaching history as potential determinants of bleaching susceptibility. Here we
address the relative contributions and interactions of each of these factors. More importantly, this monitoring effort explores the potential for a key reef building coral to adapt
or acclimate to increasingly frequent thermal stress imposed by climate change.

Along Pleistocene, at least 30 cycles of repeated global cooling and warming caused
sea level variations that dropped as much as 120 m during the Last Glacial Maximum
(~ 21000 y BP). Coral reef ecosystems, which mainly occur in shallow, warm and oligotrophic waters, were drastically affected by these events. For Southwest Atlantic, where
reef formations extend mainly in a north-south direction, the Abrolhos Bank has been
hypothesized as an important coral reef refuge, a main source of the propagules that
formed the present banks. We used phylogeographic tools to a first approach to this hypothesis. We used nuclear DNA fragments (Signal Recognition Particle 54-kDa – SRP54)
to analyze 11 samples of the widely distributed Brazilian coral Siderastrea stellata from
three localities in a range of 630 Km from Abrolhos Bank to the north. We observed
overall high haplotype diversity. Genetic structure was detected, however, no isolationby-distance was observed. The haplotype network presented two main groups separated
by at least 15 mutational steps. Although our results cannot discard Abrolhos as a refuge,
they point to the presence of two distinct areas that remained isolated for some time and
from where our sampled banks had received migrants. Additional investigations, extending the sampled area, using more loci and coalescence based analysis may provide more
details and even may detect other putative areas that might had been suitable for coral
species during the periods of lower sea levels.


TERRIGENOUS SEDIMENT DYNAMICS IN A SMALL, TROPICAL FRINGINGREEF EMBAYMENT, AMERICAN SAMOA (Abstract ID: 30005 | Poster ID: 453)

RAMIFICATION PATTERNS OF THE THREATENED CORAL ACROPORA CERVICORNIS: IMPLICATIONS FOR RESTORATION ACTIVITIES (Abstract ID: 30097)

Watershed disturbance can increase sediment stress on corals, but clearly linking sediment
sources to reduced coral health poses significant challenges for environmental managers.
This study provides a template for managers in remote, sediment-impacted environments,
who wish to quantify relationships between watershed sediment sources, water circulation
over the reef, and the spatial distribution of sediment accumulation on the reef. In-stream
sediment yields were monitored downstream of undisturbed forest, a quarry, and village, before and after sediment mitigation in the watershed. An event-wise sediment budget showed
the disturbed quarry and village contributed about 70% of sediment loading to the embayment. Following sediment mitigation at the quarry, sediment loading to the embayment
was significantly reduced. An empirical model of water circulation and residence time over
the reef was developed from GPS drifters (5 drifters, 30 deployments) and acoustic current
meters. Shortest residence times were on the exposed South Reef near breaking waves, and
longest over the reef flat close to shore and sheltered northwest corner of the embayment.
This circulation pattern explained the significantly higher accumulation of terrigenous sediment on the North Reef, than on the South Reef, as measured by tubes and SedPods. The
sediment plume discharged during storms was deflected over the North Reef, leading to
increased sediment accumulation on corals and reduced coral health. Conversely the South
Reef remains relatively healthy due to the observed circulation pattern that prevents fine,
terrigenous sediment from being transported over the South Reef.

Acropora cervicornis is a threatened Caribbean coral that depends greatly on branch
fragmentation to proliferate. Thus, understanding the patterns of branch formation is essential for the development of management and conservation initiatives. Studies directed
study, we examined the patterns of branch morphogenesis in 100 colony fragments that
were transplanted to two reefs with different light regimes. Five morphometric variables
was evaluated by means of two indices: the Horton-Strahler bifurcation ratio (Rb) and
the Carrillo-Mendoza branching index (CM-BI). We also constructed a simple discrete
model that estimates the number of harvestable branches and contrasted the model’s
prediction with the observed branching dynamics. In general, we found that 1) growth
and branching rates were higher at the site with the lowest light intensities, 2) the CM-BI
and 3) the number of branches formed during the study was accurately predicted by
the simple mathematical model. We will discuss how our results can be used to guide
management and conservation plans focused on this key species.
226

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


value of genetic linkage maps for studying the genomic basis of thermal tolerance in
reef-building corals. We present a linkage map developed from 2bRAD genotyping of
Orbicella faveolata, a threatened Caribbean coral. We also genotyped adult coral colonies
and measured the bleaching response of each in a controlled thermal stress experiment. The linkage map provided a framework for identifying several genomic regions
associated with thermal tolerance, and comparisons with the draft genome assembly are
providing insights into biological processes underlying thermal tolerance phenotypes.
We also describe a linkage map we are developing for Platygyra daedalea, using larvae
produced by crossing colonies from the thermally extreme Arabian Gulf. Larval families
produced from different colonies show striking differences in thermal tolerance, and
we are using the linkage map to identify genomic regions underlying these differences
by testing for associations between allele frequency and thermal tolerance. Together,
these studies highlight the potential of linkage mapping for functional genomic studies of
thermal tolerance in corals.

THE ROLE OF LETHAL AND SUBLETHAL PREDATION ON CROWN-OFTHORNS STARFISH POPULATIONS (Abstract ID: 29081 | Poster ID: 208)
The removal of predators through over-fishing has been proposed as one contributing factor in crown-of-thorns starfish outbreaks, but the role of predation in controlling crown-of-thorns starfish populations remains controversial. Here, we explore the
frequency of predation events, as well as the consequences of sublethal predation on
crown-of-thorns starfish. Based on over 3500 crown-of-thorns starfish collected from the
Great Barrier Reef (Australia), approximately 50% of the individuals had missing or short
arms (indication of past predation events), irrespective of the level of fishing restrictions
placed on reefs. This begged the question at what point predation becomes lethal and
what the consequences of sublethal predation are on fecundity. In an experimental trial,
sections of crown-of-thorns starfish as small as 1/8 survived over several months and
showed signs of regeneration. However, survival of sections appears to be dependent
on the size of the starfish, with sections of large mature animals less likely to survive.
Additionally, fecundity as a function of arm length was estimated for 40 individuals, but
remains to be analysed at the time of abstract submissions. Despite the biological and
physical defences of crown-of-thorns starfish, this study showed that predation events
are a frequent occurrence. Although fishing restrictions in Australia appear to have little
impact on the frequency of sublethal predation, predators are likely to have some impact
on crown-of-thorns starfish populations.


MICROBE-MICROBE INTERACTIONS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BLACK
BAND DISEASE (Abstract ID: 27880)
Coral diseases are often associated with the appearance of polymicrobial disease consortia that replace stable commensal microbiota. The polymicrobial disease consortium
of Black Band Disease (BBD) is dominated by filamentous cyanobacteria of the genus
Roseofilum. The recent application of high-throughput sequencing has demonstrated
that BBD is highly localized and in as little as 10 cm from the leading edge of the black
band layer, the microbial community in the surface mucus layer is indistinguishable from
that of healthy corals. Deep sequencing has also uncovered that Roseofilum is a rare
but ubiquitous member of healthy Caribbean coral microbiota, implying that the growth
of Roseofilum and other members of the disease consortium is constrained in healthy
tissue until these undefined restrictions are removed. Here, we present the metagenomic analysis of BBD samples from Florida, Belize, and Guam. We assembled 26 draft
genomes from the metagenomes, including five genomes of Roseofilum, nine genomes
of Proteobacteria, and twelve genomes of Bacteroidetes. The draft genomes suggest that
Roseofilum may be a net source of organic carbon, amino acids and/or vitamins for the
heterotrophic bacterial associates in the black band consortium, as well as a source of
novel natural products that may influence interactions between microbes.


STUDYING MULTI-STRESSORS EFFECTS IN CORAL REEF ORGANISMS: PERSPECTIVES RELATED TO THE USE OF RADIOTRACER TECHNIQUES (Abstract
ID: 29696)


Marine environmental stressors affecting coral reef ecosystems are numerous: from
temperature, ocean acidification). Some are already well known to impact reef organisms whereas others are about to represent a major concern. Although there are many
complex biogeochemical interactions and still a large amount of uncertainties of their
combined effects, there is an increasing need to investigate the effects of multiple stressors on coral reefs, one of the richest and most diverse ecosystems. An experimental
approach (controlled conditions) presents a series of advantages for such investigation
since it allows to gradually understand the effects of stressors on marine organism, one
by one and combined. This approach, associated with the use of radiotracers appears
to be a unique tool to understand the fate of contaminants and furthermore to clue
detoxification compartment in tropical organisms). Current methodological developments are made to allow studying multi-stressors effects on coral reef organisms at
different organizational levels (from the cells to the individuals). This talk presents the
perspectives of assessing the effects of multiples stressors on reef organisms by using
radiotracers, especially in the context of the future changing environment and will be
illustrated through a series of experiments.

Acropora spp. reproductive patterns have been well-documented in reefs from tropical
and sub-tropical areas and has shown a synchronous pattern in the gamete release.
However, there are few observations from high-latitude locations. Acropora species
diversity and spawning patterns in, Nishidomari (32°N), Otsuki, Kochi, Japan differ from
those in major coral reef areas in GBR, Australia and Okinawa, Japan where species
diversity is relatively high. Most of Acropora species at high latitude are less synchronous and are not associated with a particular lunar phase when compared to corals in
the reefal area. Here, we document the reproductive pattern of Acropora species at
Nishidomari from early to late summer in 2005 to 2015 in situ. Spawning of 16 Acropora
species were observed, starting from the middle of June to the beginning of September.
The major spawning day of Acropora spp. in Nishidomari ranged from 5 days after full
moon to 5 days after New moon in 2005 to 2015. However, from our records through 11
years, Acropora spp. spawned not only during the major spawning period from 5 days
after full moon to 5 days after New moon but also all other lunar phases. These spawning patterns suggest that Acropora spp. at high latitude may have an ability to spawn at
every lunar phase.



GENETIC LINKAGE MAPS ENABLE FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS STUDIES OF
CORAL THERMAL TOLERANCE (Abstract ID: 29731)

BIODIVERSITY ESTIMATION FROM INDIVIDUAL SAMPLES AND METABARCODED COMMUNITY SAMPLES (Abstract ID: 28851)

Modern sequencing technologies have led to an explosion of studies aiming to identify
the genomic basis for phenotypic variation. These approaches have been very successful
in model systems where the positions of genetic markers can be readily compared,
associating genomic regions and genes with phenotypes, but have remained challenging
in non-model systems because of limited genomic resources. Here we demonstrate the

Documenting marine diversity is challenging because most species are rare, many
habitats are difficult to sample, and sampling techniques provide a lot of material that is
time consuming to sort through. Accurate and efficient methods to evaluate biodiversity
are particularly crucial when sampling remote areas where time in the field is limited,

227

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

and historical knowledge sparse. In more accessible locations, having efficient methods
to evaluate biodiversity could facilitate monitoring of biodiversity. Metabarcoding, the
high-throughput parallel sequencing of DNA barcodes in whole community samples, is
emerging as a powerful method to provide biodiversity estimates, as standardized, quantitative samples can easily be compared across space and time. Here, we report how
biodiversity estimates from the fauna associated with dead coral heads, and in plankton
tows, vary among the Southern Line Islands and the Phoenix Islands. In particular,
we evaluate how diversity estimates correlate and complement each others, between
individually sampled, visually identified, DNA barcoded animals (> 2mm), and metabarcoded community samples (fractions between 2mm and 500µm, < 500µm, and plankton
tows). We also explore how these community level data can be used to gain insights into
the unraveling of biogeographic patterns across taxonomic groups.


FISHERIES COMPLIANCE AND MPA EFFECTIVENESS: AN INVESTIGATION IN
THE VERDE ISLAND PASSAGE, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29291)
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are used globally as a conservation tool in response to
anthropogenic impacts. Compliance of local stakeholders and fishing communities as
resource managers contributes to MPA success; however, there is a variety of factors
that influence its effectiveness. This study investigates the relationship between MPA
effectiveness and compliance defined as the observance to the rules and regulations
of the fisher populations including significant variables that contribute to their defiance
within the municipalities of Calatagan and Tingloy, Batangas. Moreover, a proposed
