accessible. The CSS is making available an unprecedented source of reliable data to
support spatial and structural analyses, mapping, monitoring and ecological modelling.
bleaching) and is addressing a range of ecological questions with direct implications for
coral reef management. Enabling healthy reef systems is crucial for sustainability, therefore the translation of such scientific outputs into meaningful information for managers
and policy-makers warrants serious attention.

USE OF INTEGRATED LANDSCAPE INDICATORS TO EVALUATE THE CONDITION OF “RIDGE TO REEF” SYSTEMS AND PRIORITIZE WATERSHEDS FOR
The ahupua’a concept, a linkage between the condition of watersheds and adjacent
nearshore coral reef communities is an assumed paradigm in the concept of integrated
coastal management. We present quantitative evidence for this “ridge to reef” relationship on a large-scale comparing the Hawai’i Watershed Health Index (HI-WHI) and
Reef Health Index (HI-RHI). A significant positive relationship is shown between the
health of watersheds and adjacent reef environments when all sites and depths are
considered. This relationship is strongest for shallow sites facing in a southerly direction,
but diminishes for north facing coasts exposed to persistent high surf that increase
local wave driven currents and flush watershed-derived materials away from nearshore
waters. Candidate metrics for assessing reef condition were tested against independent
measures of human disturbance to define biocriteria. Prioritization of watersheds and
coastal waters are being developed for protection and restoration in Hawai’i. This study
facilitates an understanding of the interaction between ecological processes, spatial patterns, and human activity which can be applied to improve regional-scale conservation
and resource management.



EFFECT OF ABNORMAL HIGH TEMPERATURES DURING 2014-2015 ON CORAL
COMMUNITIES FROM CENTRAL MEXICAN PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 27883)
Central Mexican Pacific coral communities have suffered severe bleaching events related
to high temperatures with evidence of slow but constant recovery. Abnormal increases
in temperature during 2014 and El Niño 2015 have severely affected to the coral com-

A TOOLKIT FOR MANAGING RIVER INPUTS TO CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID:
28357 | Poster ID: 443)

291

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

munities of this region, as well. Differential coral bleaching were registered at two insular
National Parks, Islas Marietas and Isla Isabel, with a distance of 100 km between them.
Differences on bleaching response were observed between Islands. During 2014 sea surface temperature (SST) reached a maximum of 31.9°C; mortalities were registered only
at Isabel Island (~99% coral cover). During El Niño 2015 SST reached 32.7ºC, impacting
Islas Marietas with a bleaching of 90% of coral cover. with a high recovery rate by the
end of the year and a mortality of only 2%. No recovery has been registered on coral
coverage at Isla Isabel. The species that were most affected during both events were
massive ones, such as Pavona and Porites , surprisingly Pocillopora has demonstrated
the highest degree of tolerance. The different responses of the species distributed at the
same region, demonstrate the differential acclimatization capacity acquired by the corals,
product of several episodes of stress conditions, which has been different due to the
location and the particular physical processes at each site. Coral community at Marietas
can be considered as highly resistant to ENSO events; this acclimatization will be one of
the primary characteristics that, will allow the species to maintain the coral community
from this region

PHASE SHIFT DYNAMICS FOLLOWING CATASTROPHIC DISTURBANCE ON AN
INDO-PACIFIC CORAL REEF SYSTEM (PALAU, WESTERN PACIFIC) (Abstract ID:
28857)
In December 2012, a Category 5 super typhoon passed 50 km south of Palau (Micronesia), causing a catastrophic loss of coral cover. Within weeks following the disturbance,
we observed a rapid and extensive phase shift of the macroalgae Liagora sp. Comparisons between pre and post-disturbance surveys indicated that relative changes in
herbivore biomass and coral cover did not significantly predict the extent of macroalgal
cover. In contrast, wave exposure explained >90% of model variance, indicating that
environmental conditions play an important role in post-disturbance dynamics. Settlement tiles deployed during the major spawning period (March – April 2013) following
the typhoon revealed that reefs that had undergone phase shifts experienced an near
complete failure of coral settlement, despite no limitation in larval supply. While the
Liagora bloom had started to decline by April 2013, we observed succession to a second
macroalgae (Lobophora variegata). Experimental manipulations and cage exclusion
revealed that Liagora canopies acted as ecological facilitators, providing a ‘nursery’
exclusion zone from the impact of herbivorous fish, allowing for the establishment of
understory Lobophora. While the ephemeral Liagora bloom had disappeared entirely 9
months post-typhoon, the facilitated phase shift to Lobophora has persisted for over 18
months, dominating ~40 % of the reef substrate. Collectively, these results provide novel
insight into post-disturbance dynamics on Indo-Pacific reefs, and indicate that typhoons
may also trigger rather than reverse phase shifts.


MICROSCOPICAL DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN REGENERATION AND DEGENERATION OF TISSUES IN POCILLOPORA (Abstract ID: 28450)
Tissue loss is a lesion affecting many coral species and is an important cause of coral
reef decline in the Western Atlantic. Causes of tissue loss may be infectious or non-infectious (trauma). As such, not all tissue loss processes are invariably fatal to coral colonies,
and some colonies can recover. Tissue regeneration is a fundamental process to the
normal functioning of corals. Knowing the tissue characteristics of wound repair could
help differentiate degenerative from regenerative processes in coral disease. To those
ends, we compared histology of wound repair in dominant Pocillopora in Mexico with
experimentally induced tissue loss (trauma) to naturally occurring tissue loss of unknown
origin in wild corals. Tissues in experimentally traumatized corals healed within 30 days
but remained unpigmented through day 40. Histologically, completely healed tissues
were evident at the edge of the lesion from Day 8 and onwards when the lesion site was
microscopically indistinguishable from adjacent normal tissues. Pocillopora manifested
a unique mode of regeneration involving projections of cell-covered mesoglea from the
upper body wall that anastomosed to form gastrovascular canals. Samples of wild corals
with tissue loss of undefined origin presented characteristics associated with degeneration such as necrosis and hypertrophy of epithelia with no microscopic evidence of
tissue regeneration as seen in experimental corals thereby proving the utility of histology
to aid interpretation of lesion pathogenesis in corals.

Perth, Australia
Perth, Australia
Australia, Perth, Australia
Perth, Australia
Perth, Australia


GEOCHEMICAL AND CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STUDY OF TRIDACNA MAXIMA
(MOLLUSCA: BIVALVIA) SPECIMENS AFFECTED BY THE 2010-2011 WESTERN
AUSTRALIAN MARINE HEAT WAVE (Abstract ID: 29183 | Poster ID: 288)
Tridacna maxima shells are complex CaCO3 micro-laminated structures that record
physiological and environmental changes during growth as sequential chemical and crystallographic variations in the shells. The organic fraction, crucial to shell integrity, is also to
be considered when studying records of environmental changes. In this study we highlight
the relationships between shell proteins, chemical composition, crystal morphology and
crystal orientation through geochemical and crystallographic characterisation of three
specimens of Tridacna maximafrom Ningaloo Reef, Western Australia. This multi-modal
imaging and analytical approach uses X-ray diffractometry, Raman spectroscopy, electron
probe micro-analysis, laser-ablation ICP-MS and stable isotopic analysis to constrain
the relationships between shell microstructure and composition and physiological and
environmental changes. These specimens show evidence of scaring and survived the
marine heat wave off the Western Australian coast over the 2010-2011 summer. Water
temperatures rose to unprecedented levels (over 3DegC above monthly average) causing
lethal to sub-lethal effects with short- and long-term impacts on the ecosystem. Symbiotic
organisms such as corals and Tridacna are known to bleach heavily under thermal stress,
with coral bleaching recorded from Rottnest Island (near Perth) to Cygnet Bay (northern
Kimberley region) in 2011. The nano- to micro scale effects of bleaching on Tridacna are
also being investigated using a geochemical and crystallographic approach.

GEOMORPHIC ZONATION AND CORAL TYPE MAPS FOR THE GREAT BARRIER
REEF (GBR): A MAPPING AND MODELLING APPROACH APPLIED IN THE CAPRICORN BUNKER GROUP (Abstract ID: 29071)
The Great Barrier Reef (GBR) is a globally unique and essential national resource for
Australia; however no single map exists showing its geomorphic zonation and benthic
community composition. These maps have not been produced for the GBR due to its
large extent and the cost of mapping its extensive and mostly submerged reefs. This
presentation introduces a new approach to map geomorphic and coral community
zonation for the “shallow offshore reefs”, and validate the results, for a large reef system
in optical remote sensing imagery to depths of 20 m. This approach to mapping and
modelling of geomorphic and coral community zones combines: field data; Landsat 8
derived reflectance and bathymetry data (15 m x 15 m pixel size); cyclone track data;
slope, wave exposure; object based image analysis and models for predicting the spatial
distribution of GBR coral communities. The mapping and validation methods are being
significant advance in our capability to map, monitor and manage coral reefs in Australia,
supporting management and science in the conservation of the Great Barrier Reef, and,
are applicable to other reefs globally.


THE INFLUENCE OF STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY ON CORAL REEF PRODUCTIVITY (Abstract ID: 28040)
In response to multiple stressors, live coral cover and habitat structural complexity are
declining on coral reefs across the globe. These changes can influence trophic interactions and energy flows within the reef community and have consequences for ecosys-

292

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

the reef structure. In earlier work, we showed that the relative abundance of interaction zones between corals and algae increases with reef degradation. Building on this
observation, we hypothesized that coral-to-algal dominance switches are geometrically
driven by an exponential decrease in coral surface area relative to a linear change in the
perimeter that must be defended from encroachment. This hypothesis is being tested
using a combination of metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, metabolomics, advanced
imaging and modeling of the main reef holobionts and their interaction zones. Analysis
of hundreds of samples from the Pacific and Caribbean are pinpointing viral, microbial,
chemical and physical characters that predict and explain the health trajectory of benthic holobionts. Together these data provide both statistical and mechanical explanations
for why coral reefs live and die.

tem services such as fish production. We have developed a size-based food web model
for coral reefs that explicitly incorporates the influence of habitat structural complexity,
benthic primary production, and detrital recycling on ecosystem dynamics. We use the
model to explore how fish production might change in the future in response to ongoing
and anticipated alterations to reef habitats. We show that, with all else being equal, a loss
of reef structural complexity may result in a 3-fold reduction in fish production. However, as live coral cover declines, potential increases in the abundance and availability of
algal turfs and mobile invertebrates may have positive effects on food web productivity.
We explore this potential trade-off between refuge availability and resource availability
through time, in the context of a changing reef state. We show how things may get better
before they get worse, but also that the complexity of reef habitats must be maintained
in the long-term to ensure that coral reefs can continue to provide enough food for our
ever increasing human population.



THE BENEFITS OF LONG TERM COMMUNITY-BASED CATCH MONITORING
PROGRAM FOR ADAPTIVE AND SUSTAINABLE FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT
(Abstract ID: 28228)

DYNAMIC SPONGE DEFENSE SYSTEMS AGAINST PREDATOR AND PATHOGEN
ATTACKS (Abstract ID: 27954)

The Philippines is a multi-gear, multi-fishery country that is largely dependent on fish
protein for both diet and livelihood. Over the last three decades fishery laws and management strategies have been enacted and put in place at both national and local levels
to attempt to develop sustainable fisheries. These laws and strategies include fisheries
closure through establishment of Marine Protected Areas, closed and open seasons for
commercially valuable species, fisher and boat registration, gear regulations and coastal
enforcement policies. While a combination of tools are used to assess and validate the
effectiveness of these policies and strategies, effectiveness is usually only assessed once
and is not monitored over time. We hypothesize that local policies and management
strategies would benefit from a long-term catch monitoring program to determine the
effectiveness of both legislation and management strategies. Only via long-term monitoring can the variability in fisheries and behavioral change in fishers be assessed. Here, we
reintroduce a long-term fish catch monitoring system in four pilot sites in the Philippines
to obtain information on Catch Per Unit Effort [CPUE] and length-weight relationships
of commercially valuable species. We discuss the processes in setting up a communitybased catch monitoring system, the lessons learned in applying data, issues with limited
assessment tools and the benefits of the results in evaluating current management strategies. We conclude that a comprehensive community-based catch monitoring program
can bring fishers, fisheries experts, policy makers and managers together for participatory and adaptive management options.

Sponges and other sessile invertebrates are under constant attack by predators and
pathogens. At the same time, they are lacking behavioural escape or defense mechanisms and rely therefore on morphological or chemical defenses. Sponges are a known
source of a vast array of chemical metabolites, even though the metabolic costs of
metabolite production and their ecological functions remain mostly unknown. We investigated whether tropical sponge species optimize their chemical weaponry by inducing
defenses in response to artificial predation, or whether wounding triggers a activated
defense. Additionally, we tested if these mechanisms are simultaneously used to boost
antimicrobial activity to avoid bacterial infection. Laboratory experiments with eight
pacific sponge species showed that 87% of the tested species were chemically defended.
Two species, Stylissa massa and Melophlus sarasinorum, induced defenses in response
to simulated predation, which was the first demonstration of induced antipredatory
defense in response to wounding. Interestingly, 50% of the tested sponge species demonstrated induced antimicrobial defense. Simulated predation increased the antimicrobial
suggest that some sponges further increase their defensive effectiveness by induced and
activated defenses and that these modifications boost antimicrobial activity. Predation
seems to select for induced antimicrobial defenses to protect sponges from pathogens
that could otherwise invade the sponge tissue via feeding scars.



UNRAVELLING COMPLIANCE DYNAMICS WITHIN LOCALLY MANAGED MARINE AREAS IN SOLOMON ISLANDS AND FIJI (Abstract ID: 28358)

REPRODUCTIVE PHENOLOGY ALTERS FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY FOR
CORALS IN THE EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 29563)

Diverse socio-economic developments, population pressure as well as deficient legal
mandates are increasingly challenging customary marine governance approaches in
Melanesia. Compliance with and enforcement of local management strategies (such as
temporal and spatial closures) constitute a growing hurdle for communities - impacting
decisively on the success or failure of these local marine tenure practices. Understanding drivers of (non-) compliance can inform future management decisions as well as the
design and implementation of local marine tenure rules. We have examined compliance
dynamics within locally managed marine areas in Solomon Islands and Fiji. We find that
perceptions of limited legitimacy of rules and of rule-makers, linked to questions about
the recognition and justification of power, represent a major constraint for compliance.
Using the concept of the ‘enforcement chain’ (detection, arrest/citation, prosecution
interpretation of customary fishing rights, weakening power of traditional leadership,
poor enforcement structures and monitoring tools as well as limited legal mandates) impede the different links of the chain. In this paper we also discuss the interplay between
customary and state law regarding compliance by assessing how existing (customary
and state) rules and norms (dis-)connect or add up. Finally, we make suggestions that
can strengthen enforcement and compliance with marine tenure rules, thus helping to
maximize positive social-ecological outcomes.

In the Eastern Tropical Pacific (ETP), the reproductive phenology of corals remains
largely undetermined. Here, we used long-term mean sea surface temperature (SST) and
found four thermal regimes in the ETP: Tropical Upwelling, Thermally Stable, Equatorial
Upwelling, and Seasonal regime. We conducted a meta-analysis of both the reproductive
phenology (month of spawning) and dispersal-related traits. We correlated the SST with
the month of spawning, and inferred the impact of reproductive strategies and dispersal
traits on the region’s functional connectivity. We found a correlation between the SST
and the spawning occurrences. Asynchronic spawning occurred irregularly throughout
the year in the Upwelling and Thermally Stable regimes. Spawning had a strong seasonal
signal in the warm months in the Equatorial Upwelling and Seasonal regimes. Reproductive and dispersal-related traits strongly suggested a reliance on self-seeding for population persistence. In contrast, nearly half of the corals produced autotrophic larvae, a
coral populations in the ETP are more reproductively isolated, more dependent on selfseeding, and more vulnerable to disturbance than previously considered. Furthermore,
the tight coupling between spawning and sea surface temperature suggests an increased
susceptibility of coral assemblages to El Niño events and ocean warming scenarios.


PREDICTING REEF FUTURES VIA BIOPHYSICAL CHARACTERS OF HOLOBIONTS AND INTERACTION ZONES (Abstract ID: 27861)

FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF CORALS ACROSS THE EASTERN TROPICAL
PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 29564)

in a constant war for space. Corals and CCAs holobionts win on healthy, calcifying reefs.
Overfishing and nutrification, as well as thermal and other stressors, increasingly favor
turf and fleshy macroalgae holobionts leading to microbialization and degradation of

Because of the reduced size and isolation of reefs in the Eastern Tropical Pacific (ETP),
long-distance dispersal (LDD) is considered a key process that influences their ecologi-

293

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

In the spring of 2015, the third major worldwide coral bleaching event in recorded history was observed across the tropics. Acroporid corals in backreef lagoons on Ofu Island
in American Samoa had extremely variable responses. A few corals bleached heavily
and died, while others seemed relatively unaffected by this stress. We use full genome
sequencing of 150 Acropora corals to determine the genomic architecture of bleaching
response during this natural bleaching event. We test whether the genomic basis of
resilience to climate change is shared between congeners, and determine the spatial
distribution of thermally tolerant species, subspecies, individuals and alleles across Ofu
lagoon. We find that different Acropora species had broadly similar bleaching reactions,
but that cryptic species within these complexes bleached differently. We show that many
genetic variants are shared between species, suggesting that similar mechanisms may
drive climate adaptation in different species. In particular, regulatory alleles that control
gene expression for crucial loci vary much more than expected between cryptic species
and may be especially responsible for bleaching resilience and microhabitat distribution.
These findings suggest that adaptation to a changing climate may be accomplished
through shifts in the frequencies of many regulatory polymorphisms already present in
contemporary coral populations.

cal dynamics. Here, we used a biophysical dispersal model to examine the functional
connectivity of corals between regions in the Central Tropical Pacific (CTP) and the
events from 1993–2012, exploring larval durations of up to a maximum of 150-days.
We found a very low probability of connectivity from the CTP to the ETP (0.01). Larvae
cross the eastern pacific barrier (EPB) along the North Equatorial Counter Current,
using the Clipperton Atoll as a stepping-stone. The Clipperton Atoll appears to act as a
possible east-to-west dispersal pathway from the Galapagos Islands to Marquesas and
Line Islands. Crossing the EPB is not possible with larval durations less than 50 days. Our
results suggest that transpacific LDD is possible, though likely infrequent, in the ecological time-scale for these corals. Lastly, the Clipperton Atoll and Cocos Islands may serve
as key stepping-stones and as central nodes within the ETP reef MPA network.


DARWIN’S BERMUDA PARADOX REVISITED: ATOLL OR FRINGING REEF?
(Abstract ID: 29541)

BETWEEN SCIENCE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION ACTION (Abstract
ID: 29786 | Poster ID: 699)

Bermuda is a carbonate platform complex in a relatively high latitude on a mid-plate
seamount rimmed subaerially to S and E by islands with offshore algal-vermetid reefs to
seaward, and rimmed to N and W by coral reefs. Its gross topography has long been recognized as atoll-like. Darwin did not visit Bermuda, and had to rely mostly on Nelson’s
geological account (1837) in his effort to classify its reefs (1842). Despite its atoll form
and ocean setting, Nelson’s observations inhibited Darwin from assigning Bermuda to
one of his three famous reef categories. Nelson had correctly inferred an aeolian origin
for its islands and noted the 10s m scale of their relief. While possibly homologous with
atoll cays elsewhere, their height seemed too much for a typical atoll. Also problematic
were intraformational conglomerates whose clasts were “too heavy for the wind to have
moved”. This was inconsistent with Darwin’s atoll model of ocean floor subsidence, as
posthumously illustrated by David Stoddart (1995), and pointed more to Bermuda’s reefs
as a fringing system around older islands. In retrospect, Darwin’s Bermuda paradox is
understandable in the absence of a dating framework, and because Quaternary glacioeustatic events and Bermuda’s own tectonic setting were both unknowable to Darwin
at that time. Bermuda is really an oceanic atoll whose particular history happens to have
endowed it with an interesting, if not unique, suite of unusual features.

Coral reefs are among the most biodiverse ecosystems on earth and are important
sources of goods and services, yet they are being increasingly degraded, in particular
from ocean warming and acidification. In response to a petition citing this degradation,
in 2014 the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) published a final rule listing 20
coral species, 5 from the Caribbean and 15 from the Indo-Pacific, as threatened under
confounding efforts to better determine their distributions and the habitats critical to
their survival. However, the ESA mandates that Federal agencies or applicants requiring
Federal permits for activities in coral reef ecosystem waters consult with NMFS in an
effort to avoid and minimize their activity’s impacts on listed species. In the absence of
reliable information on the distribution of listed species, maps are being developed to
show the distribution of all scleractinian corals, and the location of hard substrates they
may recruit to. Using the best available data, maps are being developed for the islands
Islands to facilitate management of listed species. Data and methods being used for
mapping, as well as challenges and limitations of this effort will be discussed.



SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT TOOL (SEAT): ASSESSING THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF MARINE PROTECTED AREAS (MPAS) (Abstract ID: 30003 |
Poster ID: 644)


The Socio-Economic Assessment Tool (SEAT) is a set of indicators meant to measure the
effectiveness of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in delivering socio-economic benefits to
local communities in the MPA’s immediate vicinity. MPAs have been scientifically proven
to enhance the earth’s natural capital in the marine ecosystem. SEAT attempts to validate
the claim that such an enhancement directly contributes to improved human wellbeing.
The ultimate goal of resource management is to strive for a balance between consuming
now and leaving enough for future generations. Thus, MPAs become socially acceptable if
they are able to contribute to both present and future needs. The proposed SEAT indicators
strive to assess whether managers are spending enough time, effort and resources to ensure
that MPAs are established and maintained using sound scientific and economic principles,
at the same time communities are benefitting enough so that they support their continued
existence, all in the context of local economic development. SEAT is an initial attempt at
measuring how the build-up of natural capital leads to the build-up of financial, human and
social capital at the local level. SEAT complements the existing MPA Effectiveness Assessment Tool (MEAT), which assesses governance effectiveness in managing Philippine MPAs.
A series of Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) were conducted among 17 municipalities.
Efforts to roll out the SEAT are currently being exerted by the ECOFISH project in an additional 42 coastal municipalities. Results of the FGDs are discussed in this paper.

DEVELOPING PRACTICAL MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES TO PROMOTE CORAL
RECOVERY FOLLOWING A SEVERE BLEACHING EVENT IN HAWAII (Abstract
ID: 28213)
Hawaii’s coral reefs suffered extensive coral bleaching in 2014 and 2015 due to dramatically elevated ocean temperatures. In some species over 95 percent of colonies were
bleached with total mortality exceeding 70 percent. Although it is predicted that mass
bleaching will become an annual phenomenon in Hawaii by 2050, consensus on current
strategies to promote coral recovery following bleaching mortality is decidedly limited.
In 2016, the State of Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources, Division of
Aquatic Resources launched an initiative to identify applicable and effective management actions to promote the recovery of the state’s coral reefs. The initiative utilized
the input of a global group of coral reef scientists and managers with relevant research
and management experience who vetted and prioritized proposed management actions.
Through this innovative process, a consensus on management actions was reached
which is now being further analyzed by the Division of Aquatic Resources for application
to potential administrative rulemaking. This project reflects a direct link from science
to policy and is a unique instance where government proactively worked with scientific
experts to actualize pragmatic management and policy actions. This study may serve
as a model for other governments looking to develop a realistic plan to accelerate coral
recovery and resilience following severe bleaching events.


POPULATION GENOMICS OF RESILIENCE IN THE 2015 CORAL BLEACHING
EVENT (Abstract ID: 28867)
294

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


relationship between SGD and herbivore abundance varied spatially. These results suggest that a complex interaction of both top-down (herbivory) and bottom-up (SGD) effects influences coral cover. The GWR method provided a superior method to traditional
regression approaches for fine scale, spatially-explicit analyses.

THE EFFICACY OF NURSERY HEAD-STARTING IN THE CULTURE AND RESTORATION OF ACROPORA CERVICORNIS (Abstract ID: 28842)
Four presumed-distinct genetic lineages of Acropora cervicornis at 12m depth were
collected, grown and monitored bimonthly for 12 months through 2006 and 2007
in mid-water horizontal line nurseries at 3m, 7m and 15m depths in Montego Bay,
Jamaica. These corals were then re-fragmented and propagules randomly re-set to new
nurseries in the same locations, wherein they were similarly monitored for a further 10
months. The second, propagative iteration’s corals started at faster growth rates than
the previous wild-sourced for the first 100 days, after which the difference reduced to
insignificance. This result suggests that head-starting does occur, supporting a nursery
period of three months or more as an interim step for restorative relocation including in
salvage, and supports multi-generational approaches to propagative coral enhancement
under silviculture themes. Lineage differences in growth and branching rates of the first
nursery iteration persisted into the second, as did the relative resistances to fouling and
bleach-causing stress of those faster-growing lineages. Apical polyps of larger corals
extended more rapidly than those of smaller individuals regardless of lineage or nursery
conditions including depth or light, suggesting that larger corals be maintained in working
nurseries to maximize overall production whenever possible. This should not negate the
use of nubbins per se, but should inform programmatic design. A trend towards hardening to bleaching stressing conditions was noted in the second iteration corals.


ULTRASTRUCTURAL FEATURES OF ZOOXANTHELLAE PROVIDE BIOMARKERS OF DISSOLVED INORGANIC NUTRIENT EXPOSURE OF REEF CORALS
(Abstract ID: 28344 | Poster ID: 90)
Increasing enrichment of coastal waters with dissolved inorganic nutrients occurs as a
result of a range of anthropogenic activities and constitutes a significant local pressure to
coral reefs, having both direct and indirect impacts on reef corals. Hence, monitoring of
the nutrient exposure of coral reefs is highly desirable to direct management efforts. Yet,
due to the fast uptake and turnover of dissolved inorganic nutrients in coral reef waters,
it is difficult to establish the prevailing nutrient conditions for reef monitoring purposes
solely by analyzing the water chemistry. By conducting long-term experiments under
controlled laboratory conditions and assessing the resulting zooxanthellae cellular morphology by transmission electron microscopy, we could establish ultrastructural features
of zooxanthellae as reliable biomarkers of the amount of dissolved inorganic nutrients
available to the corals. We demonstrate that zooxanthellae cell size, the quantity of
storage bodies, and accumulation body integrity change in a characteristic way indicative
of the exposure to different concentrations of nitrate and phosphate. These biomarkers
allow for the identification of, and discrimination between different forms of nutrient
stress, providing a potentially valuable tool for targeted management of coastal pollution.


GROWTH AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE CORAL TURBINARIA RENIFORMIS IN
BREMER BAY, WESTERN AUSTRALIA (34.4°S): IMPLICATIONS FOR THE SUITABILITY OF HIGH-LATITUDE REFUGIA (Abstract ID: 29010)
The ongoing tropicalisation of high-latitude environments and the increasing frequency
of thermal stress events on low-latitude reefs have highlighted the importance of currently marginal environments as potential future ‘coral refugia’. Although temperature
and light are often considered sub-optimal for coral reef accretion above 28°N and
28°S, existing high-latitude coral communities provide natural laboratories to investigate
the potential for coral refugia under future climate change. We are currently measuring
seasonal changes in the growth rates of Turbinaria reniformis at Bremer Bay (34.4°S)
in Western Australia; a region that has warmed at rates of 0.01--0.03°C y-1 since the
from tropical environments grown in aquaria studies (0.06% change in mass d-1). The
maximum quantum yield of chlorophyll-a fluorescence (Fv/Fm) varied seasonally with
changing light levels (0.65 in June vs. 0.50 in December); results that are comparable to
reniformis in Bremer Bay may photoacclimate seasonally to maintain net skeletal growth
year-round. We anticipate that this study will provide important insights into the capacity
of coral to grow in marginal environments, with implications for the future suitability of
high-latitude coral refugia.


SIMULATED OVERFISHING PROMOTES RAPID SPREADING OF ASCIDIANS
IN AN UPWELLING-INFLUENCED CORAL REEF AT THE PACIFIC COAST OF
COSTA RICA (Abstract ID: 27915)
Overfishing and nutrient enrichment are major local stressors to coral reefs worldwide, as
they can alter the benthic reef community by promoting fast growing and opportunistic
functional groups. Reefs in the Gulf of Papagayo at the northern Pacific coast of Costa Rica
are influenced by seasonal upwelling events that naturally increase phosphate, ammonia
and nitrate concentrations (3, 2 and 6-fold, respectively) between December and March.
This study therefore investigated the combined effects of naturally increased nutrient
concentrations and simulated overfishing on the benthic community composition and succession on settlement tiles from October 2013 until April 2014. Overfishing was simulated
polychaetes) and small filamentous algae dominated the tiles under natural conditions, simulated overfishing significantly increased the development of the colonial ascidian Didemnum
sp., with up to 80 % tile area cover. Didemnum sp. thereby overgrew other sessile invertebrates and crustose coralline algae within two weeks time, particularly during the upwelling
season when nutrient- and organic matter concentrations in the reef were high. These
findings suggest that overfishing can facilitate the growth and rapid distribution of ascidians,
which may have a strong influence on the natural benthic reef community composition and
especially its early succession patterns. Eutrophication may further enhance the proliferation
of ascidians as it increases the food resources for filter feeders.


USE OF GEOGRAPHICALLY-WEIGHTED REGRESSION TO IDENTIFY SPATIAL
HETEROGENEITY IN CORAL COVER RELATIVE TO SUBMARINE GROUNDWATER DISCHARGE AND HERBIVORE ABUNDANCE (Abstract ID: 29632)
Disturbances from natural and anthropogenic threats can lead to phase shifts from
coral- to algal-dominated communities. The Kahekili Herbivore Fisheries Management
Area (KHFMA) on Maui, Hawaii was established in 2009 to address concerns that the
reef was undergoing a phase shift based on observed declines in coral cover, ephemeral
macroalgal blooms, and turf algal overgrowth of corals. The KHFMA prohibits take
of all herbivorous species including reef fish and urchins to support top-down control
of algal growth that may be detrimental to coral populations. Here, we synthesize
multiple spatially-explicit biological and environmental data sets to evaluate the relative
importance of submarine groundwater discharge and herbivore abundance to the
distribution of coral cover within the management area. To address the observed spatial
heterogeneity in the area, a spatially explicit Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR)
was compared to a non-spatial Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) model. Both main effects
and interactions between SGD and herbivore abundance were related to the distribution
of coral cover. The GWR improved the fit of the model and allowed for visualization of
patterns in relationships between the different variables. Local models showed that the


DYNAMICS OF CORAL-ALGAL PHYSIOLOGY AND TEMPERATURE STRESS ASSOCIATED WITH GLOBAL CHANGE (Abstract ID: 29675)
Increasing climate variability and temperature abnormalities associated with global
change are significant contributors to worldwide coral reef decline. Elevated and
depressed temperatures can have profound deleterious effects on coral-algal physiology

295

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

increased storage of the osmolyte polyhydroxybutyrate, a decreased reduction of the
osmolyte and antioxidant DMSO, and changes in nitrogen cycling towards nitrogen fixing
processes. Our results show a short-term reaction of coral host and Symbiodinium to
strongly increased salinities. However, lack of an apparent physiological long-term response indicates an acclimation process that is accompanied by a microbiome community shift towards a microbiome that potentially supports increased osmolyte production.

and lead to widespread coral bleaching and mortality. In parallel experiments, we investigated the dynamics of gene expression and physiology of Acropora yongei to decreased
(-5°C) and increased (+5°C) seawater temperature over the course of 20 days. Decreased and increased temperatures cause divergent responses on dissimilar timescales
in corals and Symbiodinium; cold causes acute effects by day 5 but corals eventually
stabilize, while heat causes bleaching by day 9 and corals continue deteriorating. Using
cDNA microarrays (13,546 genes) we observed that 12.2% of hybridized genes were
differentially expressed. Cold-treated corals produced more differentially expressed
genes (1.8%) compared to heat-treated corals (0.6%) with little overlap between them.
Temperature and time had similar effects on gene expression. Coral green fluorescent
protein (GFP) concentration and green fluorescence intensity decreased with declining
coral health, prior to onset of bleaching, providing evidence for use of coral fluorescence
as an early noninvasive indicator of coral health. Concordantly, green fluorescence was
positively correlated withSymbiodinium photobiology and coral growth. These experiments demonstrate that the mechanisms of response to cold and heat stressors are
different and elicit distinct responses in the coral-algal symbiosis.



EXPLORING CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE PHOENIX ISLANDS PROTECTED
AREA: RECOVERY, RESILIENCE, AND RISKS (Abstract ID: 29032)
The Kiribati Phoenix Islands are located in the central Pacific, where annual temperature
fluctuations are typically narrow except during intense El Niño events. When first explored in 2000, they resembled a near-pristine state, but in 2002-03, a severe high thermal
event occurred. Across all islands, coral cover declined by ~60% due to bleaching, down
to ~0 at some sites. Over the next decade (2003-2015), a remarkable if variable recovery
was observed, with coral cover ranging from 18-95%. Recovery on the high end of this
scale is attributable, at least in part, to high fish biomass and the rapid jacketing of exposed substrata by crustose coralline algae. The observed variation among sites persisted
through another (but less severe) thermal event in 2010, and in 2015, while the ongoing El
Nino was beginning to strengthen. Over a 15-year period, Phoenix Islands monitoring efforts have provided insight into coral successional dynamics and resilience in a coral reef
region subject to intense climate impacts, but largely innocent of local human impacts.
Despite the three bleaching events, adult coral community structure still resembles that
of new recruits, and is dominated by fast-growing coral genera. Yet, the important differences in resilience and recovery (and hence risk) across the 8 islands likely reflect natural
environmental differences in size and positioning, coupled with remnants of historical
human impact. Phoenix Islands reefs are remote, largely uninhabited, and fully protected,
thus making them a good case study in natural ecosystem responses to climate.

PARK IN SOUTHEAST SULAWESI, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 28198)
Benthic coral reef communities are threatened by invasive and cryptogenic
species,which are promoted by anthropogenic influences and pollution. In particular,
ascidians have life history traits that facilitate the establishment under changing environmental conditions: they grow rapidly under eutrophic conditions, quickly reach sexual
maturity, can regenerate from fragments and often lack predators. Reefs in the Wakatobi
are protected but have been degraded in some areas due to overfishing, sedimentation
and nutrient enrichment. Therefore, this study investigated the benthic community composition of coral reefs in the Wakatobi in a baseline survey in August 2011 (4 weeks).
A special focus was put on the distribution patterns of an unidentified ascidian in the
genus Didemnum. The results revealed that Didemnum sp. occurred in high abundances
in non-degraded (0.66%), but to an even higher degree in eutrophic water (0.75%).
Furthermore, Didemnum sp. showed the ability to overgrow dead and alive hard and soft
corals with fast growth rates (up to 53% and 26% over the study period in degraded and
non-degraded conditions). High eutrophic conditions along with organic matter contents
are likely to promote the occurrence of filter feeders such as Didemnum sp. Moreover,
the close proximity of degraded and non-degraded sites could lead to the spreading of
ascidians through dispersal of larvae. The high percent cover of Didemnum sp. on protected reefs in the Wakatobi indicates a potential threat to the benthic reef community
via outcompeting and should therefore be investigated further.


ACCLIMATORY CAPACITY OF THE GORGONIAN ISIS HIPPURISLINNAEUS 1758
TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE IN SE SULAWESI, INDONESIA (Abstract ID:
28541)


Coral reefs within the Indonesian archipelago are some of the most biodiverse yet anthropogenically compromised marine ecosystems. In the Wakatobi Marine National Park,
Indonesia, two distinct morphotypes of the protected zooxanthellate gorgonian octocoral
Isis hippuris partition across environmental clines: long-branched bushy colonies on
turbid, degraded reefs, and short-branched multi/planar colonies on healthy reefs. To test
if local adaptation has lead to divergent selection through the action of environmental
perturbation, a one-year reciprocal transplant experiment assessing multiple traits (45:
morphological, physiological, environmental) was conducted. After one year, reduced
survivorship of healthy reef morphotypes on degraded reefs implied the onset of lineage
segregation through immigrant inviability. Phenotypic traits in healthy source colonies
showed significant trait plasticity, whereas residents from the impacted site were insensitive to environmental change. Interestingly, photoacclimatory responses were integrated
at the morphological and bio-optical levels, with host skeletal articulation maximizing the
internal light field in healthy clones on degraded reefs. Variable optical responses were
not, however, attributed to endosymbiont type, as all test colonies possessed a novel
holobiont likely represent incipient ecological divergence, with a high capacity for plasticity that has become fixed through on-going anthropogenic disturbance on degraded reefs.

CORAL HOLOBIONT RESPONSE TO SALINITY CHANGES INDICATES OSMOREGULATION OF SCLERACTINIAN CORALS (Abstract ID: 27835)
Scleractinian corals are commonly assumed to be stenohaline osmoconformers. Yet,
some corals are able to tolerate salinities up to 50 PSU, but we know little about the
mechanisms involved. To this end, studies have exclusively addressed the coral host
and/or their algal symbionts (Symbiodinium) upon salinity changes, but the microbiome
was omitted. To further investigate the role of all compartments of the coral holobiont
we assessed the response of the coral host, its symbiont algae (Symbiodinium), and the
associated bacterial community to strongly increased salinities. In short-term incubations
(4h) we measured decreases in calcification rate of the coral host and in the photosynthetic performance of Symbiodinium. In contrast, we found a major restructuring of
the associated bacterial communities after a long-term (29 days) experiment, where no
bleaching occurred and the photophysiology was unaffected. Based on the microbial
changes we identified putative functional changes of the microbiome, namely an


296

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

the functional unit of the coral and that the concentration of FPs and melanin are directly
proportional to SST and SR intensity, which in turn, are inversely proportional to growth. To
develop the model we use empirical (birth and mortality rate of polyps and the maximum
number of polyps per unit area) and theoretical parameters (concentration of FPs, melanin
will thus help in understanding how corals will respond to future changes in climate.


QUANTIFYING HERBIVORY ON CORAL REEFS TO DEVELOP A METRIC FOR
MANAGEMENT AND CONSERVATION OF CARIBBEAN PARROTFISHES (Abstract
ID: 28510 | Poster ID: 581)
On many coral reefs, parrotfishes serve as both important fishery species that support
local economies and key grazers that can facilitate settlement, growth, and survivorship
of reef-building corals. Recent management priorities have recognized the importance
of parrotfish in facilitating coral recovery, particularly in the US Virgin Islands. However,
we lack species-level information needed to guide specific management targets. To fill
this knowledge gap, we first quantified and compared the feeding behavior of the six
most abundant large bodied parrotfish species in the genera Scarus and Sparisoma by
conducting detailed behavioral observations of grazing rates and grazing preferences at
three sites in St. Croix, US Virgin Islands. To relate these behavioral data to ecosystem
status, we also quantified fish abundance and benthic community structure at our study
sites. Our results show large differences in diet, preferred grazing substrates, bite rate, and
distance travelled while foraging among species and between genera of parrotfishes. We
will use this species- and size-specific foraging behavior data to quantify the ecological
function provided by the parrotfish assemblage. The final phase of this project will be to
use our grazing metrics to model the grazing potential of the parrotfish assemblage and
forecast the impacts of different management strategies on the ability of the parrotfish
assemblage to control algae and facilitate the protection of corals.


TRANSCRIPTOME CHANGES IN CORALS SUBJECT TO PROTECTIVE HEAT
PULSES DURING MIDDAY LOW TIDES (Abstract ID: 28207)
Reef-building corals face many types of environmental stress. Extreme stress exposure
can result in loss of endosymbionts, leaving colonies bleached. However, corals are commonly exposed to natural cycles of sub-bleaching stress, which may increase their thermal
tolerance in the lead up a bleaching-inducing stress event. We monitored coral transcription daily for 17 days over a strong tidal cycle and show that sub-bleaching environmental
stress triggers a strong protective transcriptional response. These data allowed us to identify
a set of genes with coordinated expression that were activated only on days with strong
tides, high temperature, and strong diel pH and oxygen changes. The responsive genes are
enriched for gene products essential to the Unfolded Protein Response, a cellular response
to endoplasmic reticulum stress. After the temporary mild environmental stress passed,
expression of these genes immediately decreased suggesting that homeostasis was restored
to the endoplasmic reticulum. In a laboratory temperature stress experiment we found that
the expression of these environmentally responsive genes was highest in bleached corals
suggesting that they may also play a role in the physiological adjustments that occur during
bleaching. Our results suggest that the Unfolded Protein Response is a first line of defense
that corals initiate when coping with environmental stress and enhances our understanding
of coral stress physiology during a time of major concern for reefs.



CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE SIBLING KIND: SELF-RECRUITMENT AND
KIN ASSOCIATIONS IN SOCIAL GROUPS OF A CORAL REEF CARDINALFISH
(Abstract ID: 28543)

CHANGING PHYTOPLANKTON ASSEMBLAGES IN RESPONSE TO INCREASING CO2 CONCENTRATION: MESOCOSM EXPERIMENT IN BARRANG LOMPO
ISLAND, SOUTH SULAWESI, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 27979 | Poster ID: 371)

Social groups of coral reef fishes are often assumed to form from unrelated individuals
that settle into the same coral habitats. However, local-scale self-recruitment and attraction between sibling larvae create the potential for kin associations within social groups
and inbreeding. While there is increasing evidence that larval reef fishes may return
home and kin remain associated during the larval phase, few cases of true kin group
structures in marine fish have been described. Here we examined relatedness between
individuals within and among reefs and within and among social groups of the pyjama
cardinalfish, Sphaeramia nematoptera, in Kimbe Bay, Papua New Guinea. We quantified
the pairwise relatedness and genetic distance among more than 13000 dyads from 41
social groups on 7 reefs, using 19 microsatellite markers. We found a strong negative relationship between pairwise relatedness and distance within an area less than 3km. Dyads
were 1.3 times more closely related within reefs than between reefs and relatedness
was higher between individuals within social groups compared with among groups on
the same reef. We observed high levels of both fine-scale self-recruitment and siblings
settling together, suggesting these mechanisms account for high levels of kin association
within groups. However, there is some evidence of ontogenetic shifts of kin within
groups suggestive of a mechanism to avoid inbreeding. Assumptions that social groups
in coral reef fishes are made up of unrelated individuals may need to be re-evaluated.

We examine the effects of seawater pCO2 concentration of 280, 380, 550, 650, 750
and 1000 ppm on the changing of phytoplankton assemblage through mesocosm experiment in Barrang Lompo Island. The experiment was run for 48 and 96 hours of incubation periods without nutrient enrichment. The aim of the study was to examine the effect
of increasing CO2 concentration on changing phytoplankton assemblages. The result
showed that carbonate parameters (alkalinity, DIC, PIC and POC) were affected significantly with increasing CO2 for both incubation periods. Bacillariophyceae was the most
important algal group accounting for 74.5% for 48 hours of incubation period. Morever,
Diatomaceae was the most dominant algal group (50.9%) for 96 hours of incubation
period. There was no clear trend of Shannon diversity (H’) and Evenness values between
CO2 concentration and incubation period. There was clear grouping of species assemblages between incubation periods based on nMDS analysis. ANOSIM result showed
that there was no significant different of species assemblages among CO2 treatments.
On the other hand, there was a significant different of species assemblages among
incubation periods between CO2 concentration treatments. The highest dissimilarity was
found at the pair of 650 ppm vs 1000 ppm, account for 83.15%. Three taxa that were
the most responsible for dissimilarity were Rhizosolenia fragilissima (10.1%), Gyrosigma
acuminatum (9.3%), Biddulpia sinensis (9.2%). Keywords : Phytoplankton assemblages,
increasing CO2 concentration, mesocosm experiment, Barrang Lompo Island



A DYNAMIC MODEL OF THE INTERACTIONS BETWEEN ACROPORA CERVICORNIS AND ITS ENVIRONMENT (Abstract ID: 29404 | Poster ID: 526)
Environmental factors associated with climate change such as increasing sea surface
temperature (SST) and solar radiation (SR) have negatively impacted corals throughout their
geographic ranges. One such coral, which has been seriously impacted by these stressors, is
the staghorn coral Acropora cervicornis. To reduce the effects such stressors, this coral utilize fluorescent proteins (FPs) and melanin. These constitutive immune components quench
reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced during thermal stress and absorb or reflect potentially damaging light. The synthesis of these components are, nonetheless, energetically
costly. Hence, production of these protective compounds may be traded-off against other
vital functions such as growth. In this study we develop a mathematical model with a system

BLACKTIP REEF SHARKS (CARCHARHINUS MELANOPTERUS) SHOW HIGH CAPACITY FOR WOUND HEALING AND RECOVERY FOLLOWING INJURY (Abstract
ID: 28034 | Poster ID: 277)
Wound healing is important for sharks from the earliest life stages -- for example, as the ‘umbilical scar’ in viviparous species heals -- through adulthood where sharks can incur a range
of injuries from natural and anthropogenic sources. Despite anecdotal accounts of rapid
healing in elasmobranchs, data regarding recovery and survival from different wound or
injury types has not been systematically collected. In blacktip reef sharks, we documented:

297

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

1) ‘umbilical scar’ healing in wild-caught neonates reared for 30d in flow-through laboratory
aquaria in French Polynesia; 2) survival and recovery of free-swimming individuals in Australia and French Polynesia following a range of injuries; and 3) long-term survival following
suspected shark-finning activities. Laboratory monitoring, tag-recapture records, telemetry
data, and photo-identification records suggest that blacktip reef sharks have a high capacity
to survive and recover from small to even large and severe wounds. Healing rates, recovery,
and survival are important factors to consider when assessing impacts of habitat degradation and fishing stress on shark populations. However, individual survival may depend more
on handling practices and physiological stress rather than the extent of physical injury. Our
findings also contribute to discussions regarding the ethics of tagging practices used in
elasmobranch research and provide baseline healing rates that may increase the accuracy
in estimating reproductive timing inferred from mating scars and birth dates for neonates
based on umbilical scar healing status.

PARROTFISH HERBIVORY AND POTENTIAL RECOVERY OF CORALS IN THE
CARIBBEAN: USING SPECIES-LEVEL DATA TO PREDICT ASSEMBLAGE-LEVEL
IMPACTS (Abstract ID: 29606)
Coral reefs have been in decline for many years throughout much of the Caribbean.
While the causes are still debated, the loss of herbivores and subsequent increase in
algae has likely played an important role in many locations. In recent years, there have
been increasing calls for protection of key herbivores, especially parrotfishes, since
increasing parrotfish abundance should reduce algal cover and algal competition with
corals and/or provide additional free space for coral settlement. While protection of
herbivores in general should increase herbivory, different species have different feeding
and habitat preferences, and therefore should have different impacts on benthic communities. Therefore, the grazing impact of parrotfish assemblages may vary dramatically
with changes in assemblage structure. We use data on species-level grazing preferences
of parrotfishes in the Florida Keys and USVI combined with long-term monitoring data
on parrotfish abundance to predict overall assemblage-level grazing impacts. Our results
show that overall grazing impacts vary dramatically both geographically and among
habitat types, suggesting that different parrotfish assemblages are likely to have very
different impacts on benthic algae, and therefore also vary in the strength of indirect effects on corals. Our approach can provide concrete predictions for reef managers about
how changes in parrotfish assemblages may influence grazing, algae, and corals using
widely-available reef fish monitoring data, thereby providing a powerful tool to improve
management coral reef ecosystems.


EPIZOOTIOLOGY OF BLACK BAND DISEASE ON SCLERACTINIAN CORALS OF
KAUAI, HAWAII, USA (Abstract ID: 28914 | Poster ID: 159)
Since its discovery in the Florida Keys in 1973, black band disease (BBD), a tissue loss
disease that infects multiple coral genera in the Caribbean, Red Sea, and Indo-Pacific,
has emerged as a serious threat to the reefs worldwide. BBD is a polymicrobial disease
consisting of three main microorganisms: a filamentous cyanobacterium, sulfideoxidizing bacteria, and sulfate-reducing bacteria. In 2011, the first potential outbreak of
BBD was reported in the Hawaiian Archipelago off the Island of Kauai. Histology and
microscopy of coral lesion samples from Kauai revealed a mixed assemblage of motile
cyanobacteria and filamentous bacteria associated with cell necrosis. Laboratory infection trials demonstrated that BBD lesion material infected 94.4% of exposed coral within
4 days of inoculation (n=18). Amplification and sequencing of 16S rRNA and dsrA
genes from bacteria cultured from disease lesions identified a cyanobacterium similar
to Pseudoscillatoria coralii, a sulfide-oxidizing Beggiatoa sp., and several sulfate-reducing
bacteria; showing that the three common BBD constituents are present in lesion material
from Kauai. Surveys found BBD widespread on the north and east facing shores of Kauai
with disease prevalence ranging from 0.24% to 7.9%; it was observed to infect three reefbuilding Montipora species. In other regions, BBD prevalence increases with elevated
water temperatures, and this trend was observed with BBD on the reefs of Kauai. This
first report of BBD in Hawaii which extends the geographic range of this disease.


TWENTY YEARS OF CHANGE AND IMPACTS OF THE 2014/2015 BLEACHING
EVENT ON FLORIDA KEYS REEFS (Abstract ID: 29810)
Corals in the Florida Keys have been subjected to elevated thermal stress for two consecutive years (2014 and 2015) due to a strengthening El Nino weather pattern. Moderate to severe bleaching has been documented in 2014 and 2015 with extensive bleaching
persisting well into the cooler, winter months. The last mass, widespread bleaching
event in the Florida Keys coincided with the 1997/1998 El Nino and reduced coral
cover by up to 40% on some reefs. The Coral Reef Evaluation and Monitoring Project
(CREMP) documented this mass mortality and has studied the condition of reefs in the
Florida Keys since 1996. CREMP performs annual assessments at 40 sites and the data
collected has provided invaluable information on how the benthic assemblages have
changed on Florida Keys reefs the last 20 years. At the time of the 1997/1998 El Nino,
the effects of bleaching. In contrast, the metrics used to evaluate the current 2014/2015
event include a robust demographic dataset that assesses the changes in density and
the more conventional percent cover estimates. Using a combination of traditional techniques (percent cover) coupled with more progressive population measures will allow for
the most comprehensive assessment of a mass bleaching event in the Florida Keys to
date. This presentation will summarize changes in coral abundance after the 2014/2015
bleaching years and place the results within the context of how Florida Keys reefs have
changed the last 20 years


SPECTRAL REFLECTANCE OF PALAUAN REEF-BUILDING CORAL WITH DIFFERENT SYMBIONTS IN RESPONSE TO ELEVATED TEMPERATURE (Abstract ID: 27958)
Spectral reflectance patterns of corals are driven largely by the pigments of photosynthetic symbionts within the host cnidarian. The warm inshore bays and cooler offshore
reefs of Palau share a variety of coral species hosting different dinoflagellates (genus:
under elevated temperature regimes inshore, and primarily Clade C types in the cooler
reefs offshore. Spectral reflectance of two species of coral, Cyphastrea serailia and
Pachyseris rugosa, from both Inshore and Offshore locations shared multiple features
between sites and to global data from other studies. No clear reflectance features
compared to the same coral species with different symbionts. Reflectance from Inshore
absent from Offshore samples. Integrated reflectance across visible wavlengths had an
inverse correlation to symbiont cell density and could be used as a relative indicator of
the symbiont abundance for each type of coral. As hypothesized, coral colonies from
Offshore with Clade C symbionts showed a greater response to experimental heating,
manifested as decreased symbiont density and increased reflectance or “bleaching’ than
to distinguish symbiont types, spectral differences related to symbiont abundance could
prove useful in field and remote sensing studies.


REEF FLAT CORES FROM THE INSHORE GREAT BARRIER REEF PRESERVE
RECORDS OF HOLOCENE REEF GROWTH, TERRESTRIAL SEDIMENTATION
AND TROPICAL CYCLONES (Abstract ID: 28416)
Multiple natural and anthropogenic stressors threaten inshore coral reefs of Australia’s
Great Barrier Reef (GBR) located in relatively turbid and shallow water. To better understand present and future reef response to various stressors, baseline long-term data on
coral reef growth is required. Growth chronologies of coral reefs can provide valuable
insight into past reef development and variability and can further our understanding of
present reef condition. We examined the chronostratigraphy of five fringing reefs on
the inner and mid-shelf regions of the central GBR that are located on a gradient of
298

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

distance from the coast and associated anthropogenic impacts. Our record is based on
41 reef cores that capture the entire Holocene reef framework and matrix sequence,
terminating in pre-reefal substrates. Cores are chronologically constrained by 112 high
precision U-Th ages from in situ corals in the cores and fossil microatolls. Reef initiation
age, antecedent substrate, reef accretion rates and mode, and coral palaeo-ecology
varied between the five sites. However, reef flat formation began in the mid-Holocene
at all sites with approximately 80% of each reef structure emplaced by 2,000 yBP and
little net accretion occurring since. Late Holocene sea-level fall, tropical cyclones and
sedimentation influenced Holocene reef accretion at each site to varying degrees. Terrestrial sedimentation was markedly greater on inshore sites, while the physical effects of
tropical cyclones on reef development and geomorphology were more pronounced at
sites further from the mainland.

INFLUENCE OF A TEMPORAL MACROALGAL BLOOM ON REEF FISH COMMUNITY STRUCTURE IN NORTHWEST CALUMPANG PENINSULA (Abstract ID:
28641 | Poster ID: 261)
An unusually dense benthic algal bloom occurs in Northwest, Calumpang Peninsula
during the first few months of every year (February-April). We examined the impact
of this event on reef fish community structure in three periods: Before the bloom
(November 2015 & January 2016), During the bloom (April-May 2015), and After the
bloom (July-August 2015). Benthic community surveys and fish visual census for both
reef fish adults and recruits were conducted in two stations in the study site. For each
station, two permanent 50x10m belt transects were laid and surveyed for both recruits
and adults. Within the permanent belt transects, an additional four 50x2m belt transects
were laid randomly for recruit surveys. Initial results showed three important findings:
(1) adult fish community structure was highly similar during the three periods (2) highest
fish species richness was recorded during the bloom, and (3) species composition of
recruits was consistently different across periods. Analysis of similarities (ANOSIM)
show that the presence/absence of recruits of Acanthochromis polyacanthus, Cirrhilabrus cyanopleura, Thalassoma lunare, and Pseudanthias huchtii strongly contributed
to the dissimilarity in community assemblage between periods. However, the temporary
increase in benthic algal cover did not cause significant negative change in the adult reef
fish assemblage of the study area.


VIRAL OUTBREAK IN CORALS ASSOCIATED WITH AN IN SITUBLEACHING
EVENT: ATYPICAL HERPES-LIKE VIRUSES AND A NEW MEGAVIRUS INFECTING SYMBIODINIUM (Abstract ID: 29652)
We conducted transmission electron microscopy imaging and virome analysis in tandem
to characterize the most conspicuous viral types found within the dominant Pacific reefbuilding coral genus Acropora. Collections for this study inadvertently captured what we
interpret as a natural outbreak of viral infection driven by aerial exposure of the reef flat
coincident with heavy rainfall and concomitant mass bleaching. Three of the dominant
VLPs identified were observed in all tissue layers and budding out from the epidermis,
including viruses that were ~70 nm, ~120 nm, and ~150 nm in diameter; these VLPs
all contained electron dense cores. These morphological traits are reminiscent of retroviruses, herpesviruses, and nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses (NCLDVs), respectively.
Some 300-500 nm megavirus-like VLPs also were observed within and associated withSymbiodinium cells. Abundant sequence similarities to a gammaretrovirus, herpesviruses,
and members of the NCLDVs, based on a virome generated from five Acropora aspera
colonies, corroborated these morphology-based identifications. Additionally, sequence
similarities to two diagnostic genes, a MutS and a DNA polymerase B gene (based on
reannotation of sequences from another study), most closely resembled Pyramimonas
orientalis virus, demonstrating the association of a cosmopolitan megavirus withSymbiodinium. This study suggests that viral outbreaks may be a common but previously
undocumented component of natural bleaching events.


EXPORTING FIJI’S NATURAL CAPITAL: CHALLENGES FOR THE SUSTAINABLE
MANAGEMENT AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE OF INSHORE RESOURCES IN
THE PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 28223)
Exports of inshore fisheries products from Pacific Island nations have grown in recent
decades as global demand increases. These changes and their implications for coastal
communities and resources are poorly documented or understood, despite the fact that
many reef-associated fishes and invertebrates are declining. Using Fiji as a representative
Pacific Island Country, we investigated the export trade of Fiji’s inshore fisheries resources and the challenges associated with managing this trade. We found overall that large
volumes of inshore fisheries resources are exported, potentially compromising local food
security and livelihoods, though various biases and shortcomings exist in available data,
including: inconsistent and underreporting; misclassification in government records; lack
of regular inspection of export shipments; mismatches between volumes recorded as
exported by Fiji and importing countries; and inaccuracies in reporting country of origin
in the case of transhipments. To improve enabling conditions to better support inshore
fisheries management in Fiji and the Pacific region, we recommend: taxation of exports
and/or quotas to protect local food security and increase benefits to source countries;
development of a blacklist of traders with poor trade reporting and exploitation records;
development of inshore fisheries management divisions to balance current resourcing
for offshore fisheries management; protecting vulnerable species from domestic and
export trade, and improved monitoring systems that directly feed into decision-making
for management.


GENETIC SEASCAPE REVEALS THAT ECOLOGICAL-EVOLUTIONARY PATTERNS IN PORITES PANAMENSIS CONFORM TO RELAXED VERSION OF THE
ABUNDANT CENTRAL HYPOTHESIS (Abstract ID: 28734)


The coral fauna of the Eastern Tropical Pacific (ETP) is depauperate and peripheral;
therefore, it is important to understand the factors allowing its survival. Here, we use a
genetic seascape approach to test genetic predictions of the relaxed version of Abundant Center Hypothesis (rel-ACH) in Porites panamensis, a hermatypic coral endemic
revealed that the northern populations from the Baja California peninsula are the center
of abundance while the southern continental populations along the continental margin
are peripheral relative to it. Genetic patterns of diversity and structure of nuclear DNA
sequences (ribosomal DNA and single copy open reading frame) and five alloenzymatic
loci are in agreement with ecological niche modeling. We found higher diversity levels
in the peninsular populations and a significant differentiation between peninsular and
continental colonies. In addition, continental populations showed higher levels of differentiation and lower connectivity among each other than peninsular populations. The
geographic patterns of abundance, genetic diversity, genetic structure, and gene flow

SEASCAPE GENETICS ALONG ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS IN THE ARABIAN PENINSULA: INSIGHTS FROM DDRAD SEQUENCING OF ANEMONEFISHES
(Abstract ID: 28009)
Understanding the processes that shape patterns of genetic structure across space is a
central aim of landscape genetics. Here, we evaluated the genomic composition of the
two-band anemonefish Amphiprion bicinctus across its entire geographic range in the
Red Sea and Gulf of Aden, as well as its close relative, Amphiprion omanensis endemic
to the southern coast of Oman. Both the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea are complex and
environmentally heterogeneous marine systems that provide an ideal scenario to address
these questions. Our findings confirm the presence of two genetic clusters previously
299

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

seascape configuration, with evidence of both Isolation by Distance (IBD) and Isolation
by Environment (IBE). In addition to IBD and IBE, genetic structure among sites was
best explained when two barriers to gene flow were also accounted for. One of these
coincides with a strong oligotrophic-eutrophic gradient at around 16-20˚N in the Red Sea.
The other agrees with an historical bathymetric barrier at the straight of Bab al Mandab.
Finally, these data support the presence of inter-specific hybrids at an intermediate suture
zone at Socotra and indicate complex patterns of genomic admixture in the Gulf of
Aden with evidence of introgression between species. Our findings highlight the power of
recent genomic approaches to resolve subtle patterns of gene flow in marine seascapes.

THE CIVIL RESOURCE VIOLATIONS SYSTEM (CRVS) UTILIZING HAWAII’S
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE TO IMPROVE ENFORCEMENT AND ADJUDICATION
OF MARINE RESOURCE VIOLATIONS (Abstract ID: 29045)
In Hawaii, virtually all enforcement of marine resource violations is handled through the
issuance of criminal citations. This process, which requires the defendant to appear in
court for a hearing, is costly and time-consuming for judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, enforcement officers, and defendants. Additionally, overcrowded court dockets often preclude the careful deliberation necessary to understand complex natural resource
issues and laws, resulting in inconsistent rulings and dismissed cases. As an alternative
to criminal prosecution, Hawaii law authorizes the use of a civil administrative code, the
Civil Resource Violations System (CRVS), to process marine resource violations. Under
CRVS, enforcement officers can issue civil citations akin to parking tickets which are
processed administratively by the Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR),
rather than through the criminal court system. This presentation will explore the many
benefits and challenges of utilizing CRVS to enforce and adjudicate marine resource
violations. It also outlines additional policy changes that would further strengthen CRVS
as an enforcement tool.


CORALLINE GEOCHEMICAL SIGNATURE TO IDENTIFY ANTHROPOGENIC
INFLUENCES ON INSHORE CORAL REEFS OF MAGNETIC ISLAND, GREAT BARRIER REEF (GBR) (Abstract ID: 29072 | Poster ID: 432)


Although the GBR is the best managed coral reef system in the world, its initial inshore
coral cover has decreased significantly in last few decades. This has been thought to be
related to poor water quality associated with massive land use changes and rapid expansion of the ports along east coast of Queensland. However, due to lack of scientific evidences it has not been possible to adequately and objectively evaluate if the degradation
of corals is a natural phenomenon or caused by human induced deterioration of water
fringing reefs are influenced by terrestrial influx from the Burdekin catchment and also
by resuspended fine sediment plume during dredging operations undertaken at the Port
of Townsville. A close association among Ross River discharge, Mn/Ca, and Y/Ca has
been observed. A sharp increase in total rare earth element concentration from 2006 to
present coincides with the increased flood frequency during this time window. A major
goal of this current work is to disentangle the impact of natural and human induced
environmental change, principally by correlating the timing of abrupt changes in highresolution coralline geochemical signatures with the specific natural and anthropogenic
drivers. This work will allow better decision making where the best balance environmental protection and economic benefit can be achieved by developing best practise
strategies for coastal land use.

POPULATION GENOMICS REVEALS CRYPTIC HYBRIDIZATION IN A CORAL
REEF FISH (GENUS: DASCYLLUS ) (Abstract ID: 28215)
Cocos (Keeling) and Christmas Islands sit at the border of the Indian and Pacific Ocean
bioregions. They represent a secondary contact zone for multiple marine species and
populations that were isolated during Pleistocene glaciations. They are considered a
marine suture zone, where closely related species from separate biogeographic regions
overlap and interbreed. To date, 15 cases of hybridization between coral reef fishes
have been documented in this region, making it an interesting area for speciation studies. In this project, Restriction Site Associated DNA sequencing (RADSeq) indicates
hybridization between highly differentiated Pacific and Indian Ocean genetic clades of
the three-spot dascyllus, Dascyllus trimaculatus. Since there are only subtle differences
in color between Indian and Pacific populations, hybridization in this pair had remained
undetected. These analyses reveal that the pattern within the suture zone is not homogeneous: Cocos Islands have a genetically stable population that underwent hybridization
in the past, whereas hybridization is ongoing at Christmas Island. Further, we examine
if introgression occurs more often on genomic regions under selection, promoting (or
slowing) adaptive divergence. This project exemplifies how genomic techniques are unraveling more cases of hybridization in marine suture zones, while showing that patterns
of introgression can be quite different at relatively small spatial scales. This research is
important for understanding how hybridization contributes to evolutionary novelty of
Indo-Pacific coral reefs.


TAXONOMIC STUDY OF CORAL ASSOCIATED FISHESAND THEIR PARASITES
OF SAINT MARTIN’S ISLAND IN THE BAY OF BENGAL (Abstract ID: 29411 |
Poster ID: 254)
This paper provides a detail first time taxonomical study of coral associated fish and
their parasites from St. Martin’s Island of Bay of Bengal. The information be gathered
which will enable the compilation of a checklist and identification guide. St. Martin’s
Island is the only coral island of Bangladesh. Tourism has been increased deliberately
which is posing threat to the island and its biodiversity although Bangladesh Government has declared this island as Ecologically Critical Area (ECA) in 1999. Fish surveys
were conducted from February, 2014 to December, 2015 in the seven visits. Fish
specimens were collected from local fishermen in the fish landing zone and fish market
and also from local boys who collect these fishes by using hook and line. After that
specimens were preserved in cool box till transfer at -20℃. Among coral associated fish
40 species of 28 genera and 19 families under 3 orders (Perciformes, Beryciformes and
Scorpaeniformes) were identified on the basis of morphometrics and meristics. Among
three orders, Perciformes was dominant and which belongs 17 families and 37 species,
whereas other two orders contain only single family of each. For parasitic observation,33 fish individuals of the10 species were studied and among them12 individuals of
the 4 species were infected by parasites only. Single nematode and 122 larval cestodes
were identified and their prevalence and intensity were 36.36% and 10.25 respectively.
Prevalence of larval cestodes(33.33%)was greater than nematode (3.03%) and male
fish(27.27%) was more infected than female (9.09%).

