event, then again in 2003/04, when their total abundance had increased to 150% of
the original areal cover. A further survey in 2010/11 suggested that the habitat still had
not recovered. During this last survey Tropical Cyclone Yasi damaged parts of the reef,
but bioeroding sponges showed no signs of being negatively affected. Lateral growth
rates of one of the most dominant species, Cliona orientalis Thiele, 1900, were found
to reach 5 cm yr-1, and its downward bioerosion of framework could amount to 1 mm
yr-1. Locally, this species alone is able to erode more than 15 kg m-2 yr-1 and belongs
to a species complex that is thought to include sponges that can rapidly unbalance reef
carbonate budgets.


AN EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH TO ASSESSING REEF RESILIENCE: PREDICTING THE LIKELIHOOD AND REVERSIBILITY OF ABRUPT CORAL-TO-MACROALGAE STATE TRANSITIONS (Abstract ID: 27905)


Coral reefs can switch abruptly from a coral community to one where seaweeds are a
major space holder. Effective means to prevent such a shift or restore the coral state can
benefit by knowledge of three issues: (1) how much herbivory is needed to prevent the
widespread establishment of macroalgae; (2) where ambient herbivory lies in relation
to the minimum needed to retain control; and (3) whether there is hysteresis in the
herbivory – macroalgae relationship that would hinder reversibility of the state shift.
We developed an experimental approach to answer those questions and applied it to
reefs surrounding Moorea, French Polynesia. Our design created a gradient in herbivory,
which broadly mimicked the effect of variation in fishing intensity on herbivorous fishes.
We found that the shape of the herbivory – macroalgae relationship was highly nonlinear, with a sharp herbivory threshold below which seaweeds escaped control. Further,
the intensity of ambient herbivory in relation to the tipping point varied among reefs;
herbivory at some reefs was far above the threshold while at others it was not. Hysteresis
also was evident in the relationship, indicating that it took more herbivory to remove
seaweeds than to prevent them from becoming established. We also found that reversibility of the state shift, as indicated by the range of herbivory over which hysteresis was
detected, varied among reefs. Our experimental approach can be applied to other reef
systems, and as such, it can provide a powerful tool to inform resilience-based management strategies.

METRICS OF SUCCESS FOR ACROPORA RESTORATION IN THE CARIBBEAN
(Abstract ID: 29417)
In-situ coral nurseries and coral gardening methods are increasingly used for the restoration of the threatened staghorn coral, Acropora cervicornis. To date, > 65,000 staghorn
corals have been outplanted in Florida alone and expanding efforts are now having positive impacts at ecologically relevant scales. Here we: 1) outline key findings from regional
restoration programs in Florida and Puerto Rico, and 2) propose benchmarks that can
be used to evaluate the success of each step of the gardening process. Our combined
data establish that the collection of fragments does not negatively impact donor colonies
and that the survival of nursery fragments was >90% over the first year. Nursery corals
demonstrated healthy growth (10.3-29.5 cm yr-1) with significant variability between
genotypes and platform types. Survival of outplanted corals was >80% after 2 years and
strong growth was maintained. However, performance of genotypes within nurseries
was not always predictive of performance on natural reefs. High survivorship and growth
of corals, both within nurseries and after transplantation, demonstrates the effectiveness
of nursery and outplanting programs to enhance threatened Acropora populations. The
benchmarks of success suggested here, based on the careful tracking of thousands of
corals, will ensure restoration projects are meeting acceptable goals and promote the


THERMAL TOLERANCE OF CORALS FROM THE NATURALLY EXTREME KIMBERLEY REGION IN NORTHWEST AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 27983)
Naturally extreme temperature environments such as the Kimberley region in northwest
Australia provide ideal natural laboratories to understand what drives coral thermal toler-

309

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

advancement of restoration sciences. Departures from these benchmarks should be
assessed and direct the improvement of both nursery and outplanting methodologies
and site selection.

MULTI-FACTOR ASSESSMENT OF RESILIENCE POTENTIAL OF CORAL REEFS
IN THE MAIN HAWAIIAN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29754)
Declining health of coral reef ecosystems led scientists to search for factors that support
reef resilience: the ability of reefs to resist and recover from environmental disturbance.
Expert review of potential factors highlighted eleven that can affect reef resilience.
These factors were quantifiable, and included fishing pressure, sea surface temperature
variability, pollution and sedimentation from run-off from adjacent watersheds, and
characteristics of coral and reef fish assemblages. These factors were used as an analytical framework to conduct a quantitative assessment of the resilience potential of reefs
throughout the main Hawaiian Islands (mHI). Locations of Rapid Ecological Assessment
(REA) surveys conducted by the NOAA were used to delineate study units, or ‘georegions.’ REA surveys provided data to quantify biological/ecological resilience factors,
while external data sources were used to inform physical and environmental factors.
Scores for each factor were normalized and averaged to produce a composite resilience
score for each georegion. This reef resilience assessment delineated and compared 29
and east Maui georegions, and lowest for the south O’ahu georegion. Factors such as
fishing pressure, sedimentation, herbivore biomass and macroalgal cover provided the
greatest differentiation among georegions. These factors can all be influenced locally,
highlighting potential avenues for targeted, resilience-based management efforts.


PREDATION AND NUTRIENTS AFFECT THE SUCCESS AND MICROBIOME OF A
FOUNDATIONAL CORAL (Abstract ID: 27792)
Elevated nutrients and altered food webs are common threats to ecosystems worldwide.
On coral reefs, the impacts of nutrients and herbivory on coral-algal interactions have
been extensively documented, yet the role of direct predation and nutrients on corals
and their symbionts remains elusive. Here, we assess the effects of predation by a
prevalent coral predator (the short coral snail, Coralliophila abbreviata) and nutrient
enrichment on staghorn coral, Acropora cervicornis, and its microbiomes using a factorial experiment and high-throughput DNA sequencing. Predation significantly reduced
growth, increased mortality and turf algae colonization, and altered the microbiomes
of experimental corals. In contrast, nutrient enrichment most strongly affected coral
microbial communities, markedly increasing the abundance of a Rickettsia-like organism
(RLO) and reducing overall microbial diversity. Notably, this RLO is currently a suspected
pathogen of the coral ‘white band’ disease, and was also found to strongly correlate
with reduced growth rates in nutrient-exposed corals. These results show that predation
can strongly suppress the success of small corals, while nutrient enrichment may have
important, but visually imperceptible, effects on coral health by altering microbiomes.
This research has novel implications for understanding the restoration or recovery of
corals and the effects of top-down and bottom-up control on foundation species and
their associated microbial communities.


MOLECULAR SIGNATURES OF TRANSGENERATIONAL BRAIN RESPONSE TO
OCEAN ACIDIFICATION IN A REEF FISH (Abstract ID: 29226)


The impact of ocean acidification on marine ecosystems will depend on the capacity
for species to adapt. Recent studies show that the behaviour of reef fishes is impaired
at projected future CO2 levels; however there is also individual variation that might
promote adaptation. We used a genome-wide approach to evaluate the potential
heritability of this variation in CO2 sensitivity in the spiny damselfish, Acanthochromis
polyacanthus. Offspring of CO2 tolerant and CO2 sensitive parents were reared at
near-future CO2 (754 μatm) or present-day control levels (414 μatm). By integrating 36
brain transcriptomes and proteomes with a de novo assembled genome we investigated
the molecular responses of the fish brain to increased CO2 and the expression of
parental tolerance to high CO2 in the offspring molecular phenotype. Exposure to high
CO2 resulted in differential regulation of 173 and 62 genes and 109 and 68 proteins in
the tolerant and sensitive groups respectively. Importantly, the majority of differences
between offspring of tolerant and sensitive parents occurred in high CO2 conditions.
Consequently, there was a clear signature of parental sensitivity to high CO2 in the
molecular phenotype of the offspring, primarily driven by circadian rhythm genes. This
transgenerational molecular signature suggests that individual variation in CO2 sensitivity could facilitate adaptation of fish populations to ocean acidification.

A DECADE OF SUCCESSFUL PARTNERSHIPS THROUGH NOAA’S CORAL REEF
CONSERVATION PROGRAM FISHERY LIAISONS IN THE US PACIFIC ISLANDS
REGION (Abstract ID: 29016)
Lack of capacity continues to constrain coral reef conservation. For the past decade
NOAA’s Coral Reef Conservation Program (CRCP) and Pacific Islands Regional Office
have supported Fishery Liaisons in the US Pacific. The Liaisons have significantly
improved partnerships and technical capacity as they collaborate with and provide direct
support to local resource agencies, NGOs, and communities, and integrate NOAA Line
Offices in the matrixed CRCP, all to improve fisheries management and conserve reef
habitat. Through close agency/public partnerships, Liaisons have helped reduce threats
to coral reefs, enhance technical capacity, develop and implement projects, and increase
compliance with mandates. The Liaisons’ diverse portfolio includes field surveys, permit
reviews, and community outreach, which provide unique synergistic benefits in understanding problems and developing solutions across the region. Successes include: culturally attuned village management plans in Am. Samoa; novel scientific reef resiliency
studies in the CNMI; establishment of a NOAA Habitat Blueprint site in Guam; and
co-coordination for the Pacific Islands Managed and Protected Area Community. The
Liaisons’ accomplishments highlight the value of strong collaboration and partnership
in management efforts, the need for programs to engage and support community-based
management, the value of using sound science to improve decisions, the need for sensitivity to and understanding of local issues and concerns, and the flexibility to capitalize
on unique Liaison-strengths. Continuing into the future, Liaisons expect to expand efforts
to improve reef resilience and facilitate recovery of ESA-listed corals.


BIOACTIVE SPONGES OUTCOMPETE SCLERACTINIAN CORALS (Abstract ID:
29803)
In recent years there has been an increasing number of reports that sponges are becoming more abundant and in some regions have become the dominating benthic organisms
on coral reefs. Some locations in the Caribbean provide increasing evidence that coral
reefs are shifting from coral dominated to sponge dominated reefs. For the Indo-Pacific
there are also a number of reports which suggest that sponge biomass and abundance
are increasingly correlating with a decline in coral cover caused by anthropogenic
effects, such as overfishing, sedimentation, eutrophication as well as climate change.
One possible mechanism why some sponges are successful competitors is the production of bioactive compounds. It has been well established that sponges use secondary
metabolites to defend themselves against predatory fish and invertebrate predators.
Studies on sponge allelopathic compounds are however largely lacking. We investigated crude extracts from 10 sponges collected from Bawe Island, Zanzibar, Tanzania
to study the antipredatory effects of the sponges and tested also if sponges produced
alleopathic compounds to overcome coral competitors. In addition to evaluating various
reef sponges in Zanzibar, we investigated in detail the chemical ecology of a particularly
dominating sponge (Pseudoceratina sp.), which we first sighted at Koh Phangan in the


310

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Gulf of Thailand. This sponge was covering large areas of the benthic substrate and
overgrew various other invertebrate species including corals. Results from both the feeding and allelopathic experiments will be presented.

EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE ON IN SITU BEHAVIOUR AND ACTIVITY OF
CORAL TROUT, PLECTROPOMUS LEOPARDUS, ON THE GREAT BARRIER REEF,
AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 28493)


Physiological performance of marine fishes is highly sensitive to changes in temperature.
Spatial and temporal variation in ocean temperatures may have a marked impact on
activity and behaviour of fishes thereby influencing population structure and fisheries
productivity. This study examines variation in activity and behaviour of common coral
trout (Plectropomus leopardus ) among seasons and between locations in the northern
and southern sectors of the Great Barrier Reef, Australia. In situobservations show that
high temperatures > 30°C might constrain the frequency and speed of burst swimming,
impacting feeding success and energetic intake. Accelerometry data from 38 acoustically
information on activity budgets of fishes exposed to maximum summer temperatures
. This study explores the implications of the effects of increasing temperature on wild
reef fisheries generally, might be impacted by sustained and ongoing global climate
change.

SUSCESPTIBILITY OF ACROPORA PALMATA PATCHES TO THERMAL STRESS
(Abstract ID: 28185)
Populations of Acropora palmata, a keystone reef-building coral in the Caribbean,
have decreased significantly since the 1970s. Currently, its principal threat is increasing seawater temperature associated with global climate change and its relationship to
bleaching and diseases. Recently, genetic diversity of the coral host, its symbiont and
their combinations has been recognized as a source of functional diversity. Therefore,
we selected 9 host-symbiont genotype combinations from each of three patches: La
Bocana, Limones and Punta Venado in the Mexican Caribbean to study the variability
in patch susceptibility to thermal stress. Coral colonies from these patches are part of
one genetic population, while their symbionts belong to three local populations. After a 3
month acclimation to aquarium conditions, half of the fragments were exposed to heat
stress (31°C), while the other half remained under ambient conditions (28.5°C) for 17
days. Photochemical efficiency, reflectance and survival were monitored throughout the
experiment and used to calculate maximum excitation pressure and absorbance at 675
nm. At the start and end of the experiment, symbiont density, chlorophyll a density and
skeletal weight were determined. The increased temperature induced cellular and photochemical changes associated with bleaching and reduced skeletal growth rate in all of
the coral samples. Fragments from La Bocana appeared to be more susceptible to heat
stress than those from the other two sites supporting the notion that genetic diversity is a
source of functional diversity.


SPECIES DIVERSITY CHANGES SINCE 1980 ON BAHAMIAN REEFS SHOWS
SHIFTS IN ECOLOGICAL STRUCTURE (Abstract ID: 29663)
Maintaining biodiversity over time is paramount to the functioning of coral reef ecosystems. Species abundance and richness change over time, but overall biodiversity is
maintained to support ecosystem services. A decrease in biodiversity can detrimentally
impact reefs; potentially phase shifts can fundamentally alter the dominance of stony
corals along with ecosystem structure. SCUBA diver photography can form important
baseline information on both species and taxa level diversity trends on less-accessible
reefs over decades. This may be especially important to understand long-term trends
and changes associated with climate change. An assessment of changes in reef benthos
was carried out combining researcher and recreational underwater photographs from
SCUBA divers beginning in 1980 to 2015. Reefs that were consistently visited in the
Exuma Cays Land and Sea Park, The Bahamas were targeted for collecting photographs
cataloged by date and dive site. The photography image database provided an exceptional opportunity to study key reef species from 2,963 slides collected on five dive sites
from 1980-2015. Changes in reef biodiversity with a focus on cnidarians, sponges and
annelids were evaluated with diversity indices and multivariate analyses. Invertebrate
diversity showed a decrease in species diversity after 1984, with a slight recovery from
1994-1996, and a steep decline thereafter into 2015; This may be especially important to
understand long-term trends and changes associated with climate change.


INTRACOLONIAL GENOMIC VARIABILITY IN ACROPORA HYACINTHUS (Abstract ID: 29258)
Coral reef degradation is a major economical and ecological concern. Consequently,
coral reef conservation is a main goal of environmental protection. To protect reefs
effectively, information about the genomic variability of corals is necessary. Population
genomic data on coral species are therefore of prime scientific interest. In recent years,
the new phenomenon of intracolonial genetic variability within a single coral colony has
been described. This connotes that coral colonies do not necessarily consist of only a
single genotype, but contain several distinct genotypes. So far only studies based on a
a colony vary genome wide and if they may differ in adaptively important genes. To
investigate genome wide genetic variation in corals we used a new ddRADseq protocol
that we optimized specifically for Acropora hyacinthus. Preliminary results show a large
number of highly variable loci. Colony specific SNPs as well as allelic diversity within the
same colony could be detected. Our results indicate that genomic variability in corals is
much larger than expected and might influence a colonies’ adaptive potential.

US VIRGIN ISLANDS AS A RESULT OF RAINFALL AND WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT (Abstract ID: 29055)


Terrigenous sedimentation on coral reefs from watershed development poses a threat
to coral reefs. We examined how marine terrigenous sedimentation varied in eastern
St. John as a function of: different rainfall parameters (mean daily rainfall, mean rainfall
intensity, maximum daily rainfall), wave height, and degree of watershed development.
Sediment traps (13) were deployed over ~26-day sampling periods near shore and at
offshore reef sites below developed and minimally developed watersheds over five
hurricane seasons. Terrigenous sedimentation was greater: during periods of high rainfall
(especially high maximum daily rainfall and high 15-min mean rainfall intensity) and/
or wave height and below developed watersheds. The relationship between rainfall
parameters and terrigenous sedimentation were strongest when an antecedent precipitation index (a proxy of soil moisture) was considered. Terrigenous sedimentation rates
at sites below developed watersheds were approximately four times greater than below
minimally developed areas, and this degree of impact was generally consistent with
watershed erosion models. Based on comparisons between total and silt accumulation
rates with published data, corals near our sites were under stress two to four times as frequently at the developed compared to at the minimally developed locations. Our results
demonstrate that sediment traps are an effective way to monitor general spatiotemporal
patterns of terrigenous sedimentation and reliable in identifying locations where sedimentation may be inducing stress to corals.

THE IMPACT OF BLEACHING ON REEF FISH SETTLEMENT: DOES NEMO
KNOW WHEN HIS HOME IS STRESSED? (Abstract ID: 27809)
Understanding how bleaching impacts the settlement of symbiotic habitat specialists,
and whether there is flexibility in settlement choices with regard to habitat quality is
essential given our changing climate. We used five anemonefishes (Amphiprion clarkii,
Amphiprion latezonatus, Amphiprion ocellaris, Amphiprion percula, and Premnas
biaculeatus) and three host sea anemones (Entacmaea quadricolor, Heteractis crispa,
and Heteractis magnifica) in paired-choice flume experiments to determine whether
habitat naïve juveniles have the olfactory capabilities to distinguish between unbleached
and bleached hosts and how bleaching may affect settlement decisions. All anemonefishes were able to distinguish between unbleached and bleached hosts, and only
responded to chemical cues from species-specific host anemones irrespective of health
status, indicating a lack of flexibility in host use. While bleached hosts were selected as
habitat, this only occurred when other options were unavailable, with the exception of
study highlights the potential deleterious indirect impacts of declining habitat quality
during larval settlement in habitat specialists, which is particularly important given that
bleaching events are becoming increasingly common.

311

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


high species-level variance. Correlation of composite genetic diversity to recent thermal
stress may signal that genetic resilience of whole reefs is under threat by warming seas.
Using highly predictive seascape models of composite genetic metrics across the Main
Hawaiian Islands we developed an approach to biodiversity conservation planning that
targets seascape features as a proxy for protecting genetic diversity alongside other targets of reef biodiversity conservation. We identify potential areas of high conservation
benefit where additional conservation actions could effectively preserve genetic diversity,
connectivity, species diversity, coral cover and/or fish biomass of the reef ecosystem.

MARINEGEO (THE MARINE GLOBAL EARTH OBSERVATORY) STUDY: SPONGES
AND HABITAT CONNECTIVITY SUPPORT FISH COMMUNITIES IN DEGRADED
REEF HABITATS (Abstract ID: 29502)


In 2015 the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama (Bocas del Toro, Caribbean Sea) launched a MarineGEO research site (The Marine Global Earth Observatory,
the first year the habitat characteristics of the reefs, seagrass and mangrove fringes and
the entire fish community (>2.5cm) of the Bocas del Toro region were assessed, also
applying methods and tools of other global platforms as Reef Life Surveys (RLS) and
habitats and the fish communities in Bocas del Toro are. The habitat degradation in
combination with the ongoing overfishing led to a tremendous loss of fish biodiversity
and biomass and a lack of omnivores, high-level carnivores and top predators. What remains is a fish community characterized by juvenile and small size fish, which are able to
live in substrates with a low - medium complexity. However, we could also identify some
positive drivers for the reef fish community. Sponges, the close proximity of mangroves
and the mangrove fish biodiversity increase the reef fish biodiversity and biomass of
such degraded systems. Also, they improved the quality of the reef fish community by
increasing the trophic level and the overall vulnerability. Negative factors particularly for
the reef fish biomass were identified as recently killed corals, zoanthids, rubble and the
destruction of the mangrove fringe.

FIRST BASELINE SURVEY OF CORAL LESIONS ON VILANGUCHALLI PATCH
REEF, GULF OF MANNAR, INDIA (Abstract ID: 29317 | Poster ID: 163)
Incidence and prevalence of coral health issues are increasing globally, yet little work has
been done on the coral reefs in India. We conducted the first baseline health study on
Vilanguchalli patch reef within the Gulf of Mannar, India. We surveyed 12 transects laid
haphazardly on the patch reef. Coral cover was measured via line intercept and all coral
lesions observed within belt transects were recorded and photographed. Seven coral
genera were found including Montipora, Acropora, Porites, Pocillopora, Turbinaria, Favites
and Favia. Average coral cover was 60.0% with acroporids dominant (avg. 46% cover).
Several types of lesions were recorded which include bleaching (avg. prevalence 2.0%),
sponge overgrowth (avg. prevalence 2.4%), algal abrasion (avg. prevalence 2.5%), and
fish and snail predation (avg. prevalence 2.9% and 1.2% respectively). Growth anomalies
caused by overgrowth of discarded shells were found in Acropora (4.3%) and Montipora
(2.1%). The most common diseases were growth anomalies found in Acropora (avg.
prevalence 3.6%) and Porites (avg. prevalence 2.8%). Tissue loss consistent with disease
was also found in Acropora with an average prevalence of 1.1%. The reefs in the Gulf of
Mannar were severely damaged by coral mining until 2005 when this activity was halted.
Reefs continue to be stressed by poor water quality and overfishing. More studies are
needed to understand the health and status of these and the other reefs of India.


CORAL TRANSPLANTATION TO MITIGATE DREDGING IMPACTS ON CORAL
REEFS FOR A PORT EXTENSION PROJECT (GUADELOUPE, FRENCH WEST
INDIES) (Abstract ID: 29600)
The port extension project of Pointe-à-Pitre required the dredging of an access channel,
including a coral reef area. Various surveys and mitigation measures were implemented:
coral and seagrass transplantations, marine mammal surveys, water quality and noise
surveys, sediment extracted quality surveys, and monitoring of marine communities.
Other mitigative measures are being considered including the creation of artificial reefs.
Public talks were also organized to present the project and its mitigation measures by
the Guadeloupe Port Caraibes. Prior to the coral transplantation, several studies were
performed to assess the feasibility of the project, determine the health status of the
donor coral reefs, identify and characterize the best recipient sites and submit a detailed
methodology to authorities for the different phases of the work. In view of all these
studies, the State environmental services required a coral transplantation of a minimum
of 4 150 coral colonies, taken from two impacted sites (> 3 ha). The transplantation was
performed from January to March 2015. Almost 4 200 coral colonies belonging to 22
species and measuring 20 cm to 1.5 m were relocated. Monitoring of both translocated
and control corals has begun and will continue over a 3-year period. The recurrent monitoring gauges the success rate of the transplantation, coral growth, signs of bleaching
or necrosis, coral recruitment, coral cover, and status of associated fauna. First results
indicate an overall success after almost one year post-transplantation.


LOCALIZED DISPERSAL LEADING TO FAMILY GROUPS IN A WIDESPREAD
CARIBBEAN GOBY (Abstract ID: 28209)
Local recruitment has been repeatedly demonstrated by empirical studies investigating
the dispersal of coral reef fishes. Local recruitment ranges from rare to common, the
extent of which depends on the biology of the species of interest and local oceanographic conditions influencing dispersal. Here we demonstrate an extreme example of
local recruitment in a shoaling reef fish Coryphopterus personatus (Gobiidae). We found
personatus forms groups of highly related individuals at small spatial scales (<10 metres),
living alongside full and half siblings as well as cousins. Within 9 reefs in Mesoamerica
we found between 2 and 6 family groups per reef. Two mechanisms could explain this
pattern: 1) larval coherence in the pelagic environment can lead to siblings from the
same larval cohort living on the same reef as adults; 2) low levels of dispersal or lack of
dispersal. We found that highly related individuals spanned multiple cohorts of individuals and we could not rule out the possibility of offspring and parents living on the same
reef. This suggests that dispersal in the species may be highly reduced, similar to recent
findings from other reef dwelling gobies.


THE DNA OF BIODIVERSITY – PREDICTING AND PROTECTING GENETIC
DIVERSITY OF REEF COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 28937)


As conservation strategies increasingly call for preserving genetic diversity, moving
beyond single-species approaches toward community-level trends in genetic diversity
is needed. With genetic data for 47 reef species sampled across the Hawaiian Islands,
we test a suite of hypotheses about drivers of genetic diversity at the species and
community levels. Key species traits mediate response of species’ genetic diversity to
the seascape. Composite genetic diversity of all sampled species shows an emergent
community-level association with metrics of habitat area and species diversity, supporting biogeographic theory and suggesting indicators and strategies for monitoring
and preserving genetic resources of coral reef ecosystems. Species substitutions across
islands may allow community-level genetic associations with seascape features despite

ASSESSING TRENDS IN TARGETED MARINE FISHES IN THE BONAIRE MARINE
PARK, LEEWARD ANTILLES CARIBBEAN (Abstract ID: 30074)
The Bonaire Marine Park (BMP), established in 1979 and encompassing the islands of
Bonaire and Kline Bonaire, represents one of the oldest marine parks in the Caribbean.
Primary human uses of the park include recreational diving and snorkeling, and subsistence fishing by local people. The BNP is comprised of a network of protected areas
with differing human-use restrictions; no area in the park is currently restricted from

312

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

affect coral growth, reproduction, recruitment, species diversity and the abundance of
reef-associated organisms. While studies of coral disease have increased, no attempts
have been made to identify infectious diseases on the French Eparses Islands. This study
provides baseline data on coral disease prevalence on Glorieuses, which is one of the
most pristine ecosystems, preserved from anthropogenic impacts due to its geographical
isolation and a historically very limited human occupation. Surveys were conducted in
December 2015 at seven latitudinal sites and across two reefs (reef slope and reef flat)
and revealed the presence six disease conditions including Acropora white syndrome
(AcrWS), Acropora BBD (AcrBBD), Porites white patch syndromes (PWPS), Pocillopora
white syndrome (PocWS) and Seriatopora WS (SerWS). Unexpectedly, we recorded high
levels of diseases with the highest disease prevalence seen at the sites closest to Ile du
lyse which is a breeding ground for large number of seabirds. The data suggest that seabird’s populations may have an impact on the susceptibility of corals to disease. Results
of this study offer a baseline dataset of disease in these unique natural laboratory and
indicate the need for continued monitoring.

subsistence fishing. One of the primary goals of the park is to maintain a regionally and
globally significant and successful multi-use marine protected area. It remains unclear,
however, to what extent high-quality opportunities for extractive and non-extractive uses
are being maintained through time. Since 1993, volunteers with Reef Environmental
Education Foundation (REEF) have conducted reef fish surveys (species-specific presence/absence and relative abundance) at sites throughout the park. To date, over 21,000
surveys have been conducted, representing ~28,000 hours of collective survey effort.
Using these data, we examined trends in the presence and abundance of marine fishes
found an ongoing decline in many targeted species, suggesting that extractive uses are
decreasing the quality of non-extractive uses such as wildlife viewing over time. Given
the importance of vibrant and healthy reefs to locals and tourists alike, we suggest that
BMP managers take action to reverse trends in fish populations.


ACROPORA PALMATA’S LAST STAND IN THE FLORIDA KEYS? (Abstract ID: 29728)
The decline of acroporid corals throughout the Caribbean over the last 30 years has been
well-documented, with noted mortality of this primary reef-builder most evident along
the Florida Reef Tract. While the framework of bank reefs created by Acropora palmata
remains, the spatial extent of the population itself has dwindled so substantially that
only few areas of multiple extant colonies remain across the reef tract as a whole. Data
from recent monitoring at 10 sites in the Florida Keys reflect particularly alarming losses,
including localized extirpation at a few sites within the Lower Keys. These losses are
not equally distributed across sites, and while chronic drivers of decline (predation and
disease) occurred at all sites, their relative impact is neither geographically nor temporally
uniform. Recent severe bleaching events of 2014 and 2015 affected sites differently as
well, notably causing near complete mortality at sites chronically impacted by corallivorous snails as well as sites previously showing high growth and low mortality (although
low genotypic diversity). The prevalence of corallivorous snail predation increased on the
remaining colonies and continued to cause high mortality on the remaining tissue. Ultimately, chronically stressed corals seemed to be more susceptible to bleaching events, but
even sites documented as healthy can suffer mass mortality. With an extensive El Nino
event expected to continue in 2016, Florida’s Acropora palmata population may become
increasingly restricted to even fewer sites. Minimizing local stressors may provide some

DIVE INDUSTRY’S CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES TO COPE WITH
The mass coral bleaching event of 2009-2010 was documented in Indonesia, where up to
100% bleaching was recorded in shallow waters. To investigate potential impacts of mass
bleaching events to dive operators, a diver perception survey elicited the expectations and
experiences of 192 divers in Bunaken, Bali and Gili Matra in 2010. Results show that most
divers were aware of the phenomenon of coral bleaching, and the diving experience was
an important reason for their destination choice. Interestingly, less than half of the divers
indicated they would have changed their holiday destination, and <25% would have
changed their holiday activity, had they known, prior to booking the dive, that the coral
was bleaching. In general, across all sites, divers valued dive conditions and dive operation
experience over marine life and perceived reef condition. Aspects that made them most
happy were customer service and friendliness. Furthermore, divers across the sites consistently preferred dive operators that actively support reef management. The divers were
also willing to implement reef protection measures during bleaching for example, through
site closures. This research shows that dive industries can cope with bleaching events if
the service is high quality and the physical environment remains in good condition. The
challenge will be to ensure that bleaching doesn’t deteriorate the reef to the point that it
significantly reduces divers’ willingness to dive in a site.


GOT BIOMARKERS? TRANSCRIPTOMICS TO RESCUE CORAL HEALTH (Abstract
ID: 29629)
Water quality is both a critical component of coral health and relevant to reef management
at the local scale. Following 2002-06 guidelines by the US Coral Reef Task Force, local
stakeholders developed strategies to reduce land-based pollution (LBP) by 25% in priority
of the proposed reductions to alleviate threats to corals is still lacking. Determining LBP response thresholds and threat reduction levels for corals is essential to effective management
and conservation, including the development of best land management practices (BMPs) to
promote the recovery and persistence of reef-building corals. In this study, we use RNASeq
to identify key genes in the stress response of four Hawaiian corals exposed to sediment
stress in the laboratory. Gene expression responses correlated to the severity of sediment
exposures indicated the best biomarker candidates. Antibodies designed to target the
proteins encoded by those genes were then used with Western blots and ELISA to validate
the candidate biomarkers on samples from controlled sediment exposure experiments. We
subsequently calculated the change in biomarker expression to evaluate the health of corals
experiencing sediment stress in the field. These new biomarker tools provide reef managers
and stakeholders with sensitive and accurate pre-bleaching diagnostics of the coral stress
response so that BMPs can be tailored to effectively support reef sustainability.


LARGE-SCALE MOVEMENT AND HABITAT RANGE OF REEF MANTA (MANTA
ALFREDI) IN NORTHERN RAJA AMPAT WATERS, WEST PAPUA, INDONESIA
(Abstract ID: 28485)
Little is known about the habitat range and movement patterns of reef mantas in Raja
Ampat, Indonesia. This study aimed for investigating the behavioural movement patterns
and habitat range of reef mantas to underpin the conservation efforts and management
actions of this species in Raja Ampat region. The mantas were tagged with Vemco
V16 acoustic transmitters. In November 2013, Vemco VR2W acoustic receivers were
deployed in eight listening stations throughout northern Raja Ampat waters, including
Wayag Lagoon, Uranie, Eagle Rock, Yefnabi Kecil, Seprang, Dayan, Manta Ridge, and
Wai. A total of 38 reef mantas were tagged in six locations. Tagging periods in general
varied between 0 to 682 days (237±27 days). Moreover, the total number of days of
visits ranged from 1 to 188 days (42±7 days). Manta Ridge was the most popular site
with 565 days of cumulative number of days of visits. It was followed by Yefnabi Kecil
(434 days), Eagle Rock (287 days), and Wai (202 days). In addition, several mantas were
detected in five listening stations and most of them travelled to at least one listening sta-


FIRST CORAL DISEASE ASSESSMENT IN THE LAST MARINE SANCTUARIES IN
THE SOUTH WESTERN INDIAN OCEAN: EPARSES ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29352)
Coral diseases have caused a worldwide decline in the biodiversity and abundance of
reef-building corals. These diseases are known to generate progressive tissue loss and

313

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

tion. Interestingly, results indicate that manta seasonal movements occurred within four
main listening stations (Manta Ridge, Wai, Yefnabi Kecil, and Eagle Rock). Furthermore,
nearly 90% of manta visitations in all listening stations occurred during the day between
06:00 am to 06:00 pm. Overall, those results can be used to assist in the designation of
manta conservation strategies, both spatially and temporally to ensure manta populations and manta tourism sustainability in Raja Ampat.

TRANSFORMATIVE AGENDAS REQUIRE TRANSFORMED INSTITUTIONS: LESSONS LEARNED IN CAPACITY BUILDING FOR OCEANS GOVERNANCE (Abstract
ID: 28697)
Development Goals pertaining to oceans and coasts. Transformative agendas, like the
SDGs for oceans and coasts, require transformed institutions. Thus, many are calling for
capacity building and science and technology transfer to assist the world’s governance
institutions to implement. This reflects a broader call of late for capacity building – in
marine protected areas, in fisheries management, in enforcement, in national ocean policies. But as broadly as capacity building is called for, very little guidance exists in peer
reviewed or other literature, on capacity building for ocean and coastal management.
What do we mean by capacity building? What works, what doesn’t, and why? This paper
will present results from learning exchanges and expert elicitation among those who
have delivered and those who have received capacity building for ocean governance
in Asia, the Pacific Islands, the Caribbean, and the Mediterranean. It will explore basic
approaches, advancements, challenges and solutions – and recommendations for best
practices by these experts.


THE EXPRESSION OF DIFFERENT CELLULAR-STRESS BIOMARKERS TO ASSESS THE RESPONSE OF CORALS TO DISEASES (Abstract ID: 28350)
Coral diseases are increasing in both the occurrence and incidence, threatening the health
of coral reefs worldwide. To date, although many diseases are ecologically well documented and efforts have been performed in the identification of the microbial communities associated, less attention has been given to the effects of the pathogen presence on
coral health/physiology and about the mechanisms employed by corals to fight and resist
to infection. For this reason the expression of some cellular stress biomarkers for detecting early signs of change in a coral’s physiological state were analyzed in corals affected
by diseases, at different distances along the advancing front of the infection. In particular,
the modulation of the mitochondrial heat shock protein 60-kDa (Hsp60) was investigated
in Acropora muricata colonies infected by the ciliate-related diseases Skeleton Eroding
Band and Brown Band in the lagoon of Maghodhoo Island, Faafu Atoll, Maldives. At
the same time, the expression profiles of Hsps, oxidative stress-inducible proteins and
antioxidant enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase, were compared during the progression of the Black Band disease in colonies of Goniopora cf. columna. The results provide
new insights into the immune response of corals. Furthermore, they highlight as different
pathogens trigger different cellular responses and defense mechanisms in corals, suggesting as the analysis of the expression of these cellular-stress markers could be a useful tool
for examining physiological variations that are not detected at the morphological level.


SPATIOTEMPORAL VARIABILITY IN NET COMMUNITY CALCIFICATION OF A
WESTERN PACIFIC CORAL REEF SYSTEM (Abstract ID: 29053)
Measurements of Net Community Calcification (NCC) are increasingly used to establish
baseline calcification rates of modern reef systems and to project coral reef futures
under 21st century ocean acidification (OA). We measured NCC of two coral reef communities in Palau in the western Pacific, one an exposed barrier reef on the northwest
side of the archipelago, and the other a semi-enclosed lagoon within Palau’s low pH
Rock Islands. NCC rates at both locations were determined for two different years using
carbonate chemistry, hydrodynamic, temperature, and salinity data collected over the
full diel cycle for multiple four day deployments. Communities on both reefs maintained
2013, lagoon and barrier reef NCC rates were comparable despite a large discrepancy
in source water pH (ave barrier = 8.05 ± 0.01; ave lagoon = 7.94 ± 0.01). Yet within the
lagoon, NCC rates in 2012 (17.0 – 23.7 mmol m-2 d-1) were half those in 2013 (42.0 –
48.1 mmol m-2 d-1), with little change in source water chemistry. Similarly, barrier reef
NCC rates halved between 1994 and 2000, despite a relatively small change in ocean
calcification is critically important in modulating NCC and must be taken into account



NUTRIENT EFFECTS ON GROWTH AND BIOMASS OF DOMINANT REEF CONSTITUENTS (Abstract ID: 29215 | Poster ID: 239)
Degradation of coral reefs has been accelerating at an alarming rate worldwide. Introduction of nitrates and phosphates stimulates algal growth allowing them to outcompete calcifying organisms such as corals in eutrophic environments. Additionally, there is evidence
to suggest nutrient availability can inhibit calcification and promote bioerosion even in the
absence of algal competition, further shifting the reef community towards net erosion.
The complexity of assessing the effects of nutrients on coral reefs is further exacerbated
by the diversity of the benthic community. While much information is available on primary production, calcification, and dissolution on reefs at a variety of nutrient conditions,
the individual responses of the reef inhabitants are not widely available for multiple reef
constituents. In this study, we examined the biological responses of dominant coral reef
components of Kāne’ohe Bay under increased nutrient availability. Three replicates of
four coral reef substrates, coral (Montipora capitata and Porites compressa), macroalgae
(Gracilaria salicornia), coral rubble (naturally conditioned Porites skeletons), and sediment
were exposed to three nutrient levels in a press experiment for a period of six weeks. We
calculated growth rates using changes in buoyant weight (coral, coral rubble), wet weight
(algae), and % organic content (sediment) to determine the biological response of each
substrate to nutrient addition. Our results will provide the capacity to parse reef response
to individual constituents and compare this to reef assemblage response.

FISH-DERIVED NUTRIENT HOTSPOTS SHAPE CORAL REEF BENTHIC COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 29583)
Animal-derived nutrients play a strong role in structuring nutrient regimes within and
between ecosystems. When animals undergo repetitive, aggregating behavior, they can
create nutrient hotspots where rates of biogeochemical activity are higher than in the
surrounding environment. We examined the potential for reef fishes from the family
Haemulidae to create nutrient hotspots and the potential impact of these hotspots on
reef communities. We tracked the schooling locations of diurnally migrating grunts, and
their impact on benthic communities. Grunt schools showed a high degree of site fidelity,
repeatedly sheltering at the same coral heads and these aggregations created nutrient
hotspots around coral heads where nitrogen and phosphorus delivery was roughly 10
and 7 times respectively greater than at structurally similar sites lacking schools of these
fishes. In turn, herbivore grazing rates at grunt-derived hotspots were over 3x those
of non-shelter sites, and coral growth roughly 1.5x greater. This led to distinct benthic
communities with more crustose coralline algae and less upright fleshy algae. Our results
suggest schooling reef fish are important in mediating coral reef community structure
and that overfishing may impair the development of healthy reef communities. As such,
management strategies should consider protecting mesopredatory fishes in addition to
314

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

to confirm functional differences in carbon, nitrogen and sulfur cycling potential between
and exerts influence on the associated prokaryotic communities. These results can be
framed within the larger context of how Symbiodinium affects the bulk functions and
overall stability of the multi-partner coral holobiont.

herbivores and top-tier predators. Furthermore, restoration strategies may benefit from
providing structure for schooling fishes or focusing coral out-planting around existing
nutrient hotspots.

MARINE BIODIVERSITY AT TAIPING ISLAND AND PROPOSAL FOR ESTABLISHING MARINE PROTECTED AREA AT THE SPRATLY ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 28557)


Taiping Island, controlled by the Taiwan government, is the largest island of Spratly in
and fishery resources. Based on a 2-4 day survey in 2014 at Taiping Island, a total number of 232 species of terrestrial plants and animlas, 796 marine species were recorded.
A book and a DVD entitled “A Frontier in the South China Sea ” were published to document Taiping Island’s rich biodiversity both on land and underwater. The result from a
feasibility study in 2009 proposed to establish Taiping Island as a Marine protected area
(MPA) or a Marine Peace Park (MPP). However, the authority has yet to approve either
one. Due to its importance in economy and national defense, the area is the subject of
overlapping territorial claims by surrounding countries. Recent large-scale dredging and
filling operations will be detrimental to the marine biodiversity and fishery resource in
called on all claimants to temporarily shelve their disagreements to enable negotiations on sharing resources. But the authority only focused on making Taiping Island a
low-carbon base for humanitarian aid at the moment. We hope their next step will be
to establish the Island as a MPA or MPP and to prioritize conservation as the priority.
Here we suggest that each disputed country should establish local marine protected
areas at the sites currently under their control, and to encourage international academic
collaboration among the sites. These efforts can ensure the conservation and sustainable
use of all resources within the Spratly Islands.

STRESS ON MONTASTRAEA CAVERNOSA (Abstract ID: 28850 | Poster ID: 409)
Coral reef declines, particularly in coastal zones, have been linked to temperature stress
and anthropogenic impacts on water quality. St. Lucie Reef near Stuart, Florida, USA
receives increased estuarine efflux as a result of watershed changes and management
policies that have substantially altered historic natural flows. This research examines the
direct effects of estuarine discharge water and thermal stress on corals, and supplements
existing in-situ monitoring on St. Lucie Reef with ex-situ factorial experimental design.
Ambient and elevated temperatures (25°C and 30°C) and offshore water versus estuary
discharge water collected from the St. Lucie Inlet were used to investigate the individual
and interactive effects onMontastraea cavernosa, one of two dominant scleractinian
species at St. Lucie Reef. Coral stress gene expression, zooxanthellae density, and
chlorophyll concentration were evaluated to determine effects on the corals and their
symbionts. Collaborative partnerships with the Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission,
Florida Department of Environmental Protection, and the St. Lucie Inlet Preserve
State Park facilitate data sharing to inform decision making for South Florida’s resource
management strategies. Creating effective resource management is crucial for the
conservation of coastal ecosystems impacted by land-based sources of pollution both
locally and globally.


CORAL ON A CHIP: A MICROFLUIDIC PLATFORM FOR STUDYING REEFBUILDING CORALS AT THE MICROSCALE (Abstract ID: 27891)


Coral reefs, which form the basis to some of the most productive ecosystems on earth,
are currently facing major challenges due to rapid changes to their natural habitat driven
by human activities and climate change. Understanding these challenges is hampered by
the lack of a robust experimental approach for studying the microscale processes governing corals’ interaction with their environment and with the multitude of microorganisms living in, on and around them. To meet this challenge we developed the Coral on a
Chip, a novel experimental platform that combines micropropagation and microfluidic
techniques to allow microscopic observation of live coral polyps. The small size and
transparency of coral micropropagates make them ideally suited for live-imaging microscopy, while the microfluidic platform facilitates long-term visualization under controlled
environmental conditions. The use of micropropagation enables us to produce of a
large number of clonal polyps from a small coral fragment, reducing sample variability
and simplifying experimental design. We demonstrate the application of this platform
by imaging coral micropropagtes at previously unattainable spatio-temporal resolutions,
providing new insights into several microscale processes including coral calcification,
coral-pathogen interaction and the loss of algal symbionts (‘coral bleaching’). The Coral
on a Chip thus provides a new and exciting method for studying coral physiological
processes in-vivo at the single cell level, opening new vistas in coral biology.

THE EVOLUTION OF MARINE LARVAL DISPERSAL KERNELS IN SPATIALLY
STRUCTURED HABITATS (Abstract ID: 28317)
Understanding the patterns, causes and consequences of marine larval dispersal is a
major goal of marine ecology. Most research on the causes of variation in dispersal
we investigate the ultimate, evolutionary causes of variation in dispersal. Building on
Hamilton and May’s (1977) classic paper “Dispersal in stable habitats”, we develop a
set of simple models for the evolution of larval dispersal kernels in spatially structured
habitats. First, we extend Hamilton & May to understand how parents will allocate to
different dispersal distance classes in a world without bound. This creates a paradox:
parents allocate most to the longest dispersal distance class. Second, we investigate
dispersal distance allocation in a world with bound. This resolves the first paradox, but
creates its own paradox: parents allocate next to nothing beyond the shortest dispersal
distance class. Third, we investigate dispersal distance allocation in a world with bound
and patchiness. This produces a more realistic result: parents allocate more to longer
distance classes. Finally, we investigate the evolution of the kernel in a real seascape
and test the predictions of our model against an empirically derived kernel from that
seascape. There is a good fit between the model’s predictions and empirical data. This
study provides a framework that can be used to model the evolution of dispersal kernels
in other species and seascapes, which will provide new insights into variation in patterns
of population connectivity.


INVESTIGATING THE INFLUENCE OF SYMBIODINIUM PSYGMOPHILUM
DENSITY ON PROKARYOTIC COMMUNITIES IN THE CORAL ASTRANGIA
POCULATA (Abstract ID: 29653)


The facultatively symbiotic coral Astrangia poculata naturally exhibits a wide range
in Symbiodinium psygmophilum densities and can be used to explore the role of
two symbiotic states, “brown” and “white,” based on Symbiodinium cell quantification.
16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing suggests that microbiome composition in brown
and white colonies is similar to that in tropical corals. While bulk diversity and taxonomic
composition are generally similar between brown and white colonies, several key
microbial taxa are differentially enriched. Endozoicomonas bacteria, detected in diverse
tropical hard and soft corals, are enriched (10-fold) in brown colonies. Sulfate-reducing
bacteria (Desulfobacteraceae) are also enriched in browns. In contrast, sequences from
ammonia oxidizers (Thaumarchaeota) and nitrite oxidizers (Nitrospina/Nitrospira) are
enriched in white colonies, suggesting a role for Symbiodinium in structuring nitrogen
cycling in Astrangia. Metagenomic data from Astrangia microbiomes are being analyzed

EFFECTS OF CARBONATE CHEMISTRY ON METABOLISM OF AN EXPERIMENTAL CORAL REEF COMMUNITY (Abstract ID: 28568)
In situ studies have shown net community calcification (Gnet) to be correlated with
pCO2 levels that vary naturally in space or time. However these relationships can be confounded by covariation between carbonate chemistry and other environmental parameters. Here we created experimental reef communities in flumes and exposed them to a
range of pCO2 levels over multiple months. Seawater pCO2 treatments reflected those
predicted under atmospheric CO2 levels of 400 (ambient), 700, 1000 and 1300 µatm.
Under ambient conditions, communities had Gnet of ~90 mmol m-2 d-1, within the range

315

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

temperature (SST) over open water as proxy for subsurface conditions in the reef zone.
However, land-adjacency effects and the influence of local-scale (< 5 km) environmental conditions introduce uncertainty to satellite-based estimates of water temperatures in
near-shore, shallow (< 30 m) reef zones. Particularly, localized oceanographic influences
data may affect bleaching susceptibility and introduce error into ecological forecasts.
To investigate these concerns, a series of water temperature profiles were deployed on
coral reefs around Little Cayman Island to simultaneously collect surface and subsurface
temperature data. Data from these profiles are analyzed to identify local-scale behaviors
and are compared to 5-km satellite estimates of SST to quantify bias. We evaluate
the differences between the data sources, quantify the scope of local-scale variability,
and discuss steps toward data integration that can better inform ecological forecasting
models for coral bleaching and recovery.

of values observed for in situ reefs. Gnet was significantly related to pCO2 and declined
by 23% of the ambient rate per unit decline in aragonite saturation state. Net community
production was not significantly related to carbonate chemistry. The change in Gnet from
ambient to treatment was consistent over time (from days to months of exposure) for the
700 µatm treatment, but for the 1000 and 1300 µatm treatments, Gnet was lower after
months of exposure, compared with the response after several days. Our results also
showed short-term variability in Gnet of the ambient pCO2 (400 µatm) treatment. These
results have important implications for selecting the duration of pCO2 exposure in both
experimental and in situ studies that rely on temporal variation in carbonate chemistry.
They also highlight the importance of long-term in situ community metabolic measurements for accurate comparisons between sites, and for detection of future change.


BUILDING ISLAND RESILIENCE AGAINST CLIMATE CHANGE THROUGH A
COMMUNITY-BASED WATERSHED AND CORAL REEF REVIVAL INITIATIVE
(Abstract ID: 29934 | Poster ID: 682)

LOCAL BLEACHING THRESHOLDS ESTABLISHED BY REMOTE SENSING
TECHNIQUES VARY AMONG REEFS WITH DEVIATING BLEACHING PATTERNS
(Abstract ID: 27889)

Climate change is a clear and present threat in small tropical islands, requiring solutions
at both global and local levels. This study took a community-based approach to building
island resilience against climate change. The removal of local environmental stressors
restores natural ecosystem functions, promoting resistance to and more rapid recovery
developed in Guam as a community-based initiative directed at reducing accelerated
erosion, a major local environmental stressor caused by poor land-use practices. Erosion
results in sedimentation on coral reefs, which smothers and kills corals, interferes with
coral reproduction and recruitment, and destroys essential fish habitat. A six-part community engagement strategy was deployed and partnerships were formed with a village
mayor, local and Federal government agencies, and academia. Nearly 2,000 volunteer
hours were contributed to reducing erosion in the La Sa Fu’a Watershed. Tree seedlings
and sediment filter socks were tested as watershed restoration tools over a 21-month period. These tools were effective in trapping 112 metric tons of sediment on land. Based
on the efficiency of these tools, management recommendations were developed to
bring Fouha Bay below severe-moderate sedimentation stress (>50 mg cm-2day-1). The
community engagement strategy and data generated on the effectiveness of watershed
restoration tools can be used in management plans to build resilience against climate
change in other tropical islands.

In August / September, 2012, a severe bleaching event affected coral communities off
the coast of Abu Dhabi in the Arabian Gulf. In Saadiyat and Ras Ghanada reefs ~40% of
the corals showed signs of bleaching. On contrast, only 15% of the corals were affected
in Delma Reef. Bleaching threshold temperatures for these sites were established using
remotely sensed sea surface temperature (SST) data recorded by MODIS-Aqua. The
threshold temperatures varied between locations, resulting in site-specific deviations
in the numbers of days during which these thresholds were exceeded. Hence, the less
severe bleaching of Delma reef can be explained by the lower relative heat stress experienced by this coral community.

CRYPTIC DIVERSITY UNPREDICTABLY AFFECTS MEASUREMENTS OF POPULATION DIFFERENTIATION IN CORALS (Abstract ID: 28246)
Cryptic diversity is commonly detected across diverse taxa with interspecies differences
having the potential to significantly inflate or deflate population genetic correlates of
dispersal capabilities. The widespread Pacific corals Acropora cytherea and hyacinthus
together contain eight often sympatric cryptic species. Using 199 single nucleotide
polymorphisms, we assessed population differentiation of these eight species across
three geographic scales (between archipelagos, between reefs within archipelagos, and
within reefs) and tested how unaccounted cryptic diversity may affect these estimates. At
large geographic distances (>700 km), comparisons among the eight largest archipelagos
always displayed significant genetic differentiation for all species. At moderate distances
(2-100 km), significant genetic differentiation was detected in 10 out of 17 between
reef comparisons in populations of the five most abundant species. Genetic structure
was not found at the smallest scale (10s m) when examining two species within two
population differentiation estimates between archipelagos and reefs greatly increased or
decreased depending largely on the mix of cryptic species between locations, leading to
inaccurate conclusions on genetic structure. Recognizing cryptic diversity is fundamental
to accurate estimates of connectivity.


RAYS ON REEFS: PRELIMINARY RESULTS FROM THE GLOBAL FINPRINT PROJECT IN SOUTH EAST ASIA (Abstract ID: 29138 | Poster ID: 276)
Fishing pressure on ray populations in South East Asia is high. They are caught for their
meat and their skin. Currently, there is little understanding of ray diversity and abundance in coral reef ecosystems in this region limiting conservation action. The Global
FinPrint Project is the first global survey of elasmobranchs in coral reef ecosystems and
is sampling intensively in South East Asia. The project uses baited remote underwater
video systems (BRUVS) to determine relative diversity and abundance. This PhD project
is using the Global FinPrint data from South East Asia to better understand the ecology of rays in coral reef habitats. Preliminary analyses from selected South East Asia
locations will be presented. Data collected will be used to inform management of ray
populations by identifying areas of low diversity and abundance. It will also be used as a
baseline for future studies.



DESIGNING INTERVENTIONS TO IMPROVE MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT
(Abstract ID: 29638 | Poster ID: 624)

COMPARING IN SITU AND SATELLITE-BASED WATER TEMPERATURE DATA
OVER TROPICAL CORAL REEFS: IMPLICATIONS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AND ECOLOGICAL FORECASTING (Abstract ID: 29432 | Poster ID: 550)

Lack of effective management of marine managed areas (MMAs) has resulted in a
continuous decline in the condition of nearshore and coastal areas in the Eastern
Caribbean. This issue is exacerbated by threats such as overfishing, unsustainable
coastal development and climate change. Furthermore, protected area managers are
concerned that MMAS are not achieving the objectives for which they were established.
Under the Eastern Caribbean Marine Managed Areas Network (ECMMAN) project, the
Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) was used to set a baseline for current

Thermally-driven coral bleaching contributes significantly to the global decline of coral
reefs on which many coastal populations and economies depend, and bleaching models
can provide valuable guidance to reef managers for monitoring, mitigation, and recovery
activities. These tools frequently use daily 5-50 km satellite estimates of sea surface

316

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

vor of some offspring. Are fates set by parents, or can offspring improve upon the cards
they’ve been dealt? Our work investigates the roles of parental investment, birth timing,
and developmental progression as determinants of fitness components. We focus on
the sixbar wrasse (Thalassoma hardwicke), a species of reef fish that spawns frequently
to produce offspring that navigate a series of demographic bottlenecks with fitness
consequences. We sampled settlement and survival of fish on 192 patch reefs over six
months, and documented lunar periodicity in settlement (greatest during new moons)
and survival (greatest for fish that settled during- or just prior to new moons). Fish also
varied in their size-at-settlement, suggesting that some individuals may accelerate or
delay development to target good ‘settlement windows’. We evaluate the ‘decisions’ of
settling fish in the context of density dependence, priority effects, and environmental
heterogeneity, and propose an eco-evolutionary hypothesis that could account for the
evolution of iteroparous life-history strategies.

management status of 7 MMAs across 6 countries. The overarching ECMMAN project
goal is to establish an ecologically representative, socio-economically beneficial, climate
resilient, and effectively managed MMA network. Since METT is a simple and rapid
site assessment system for tracking progress of management actions over time across
related areas, it provided an effective assessment tool for comparisons across the ECMMAN network. Management strengthening programs were designed for all 7 MMAs and
have begun implementation since 2014. METT has continually been used to monitor
progress towards improving management effectiveness at these sites. There have been
noticeable improvements in the overall management of these 7 sites in key areas such
as implementation of management objectives; enforcement of regulations; biophysical,
socio-cultural and economic research and monitoring; stakeholder awareness, concern
and participation; and successes towards threat abatement.


THE THERMAL TOLERANCE OF CORAL-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES ACCLIMATED TO TEMPERATURE STRESS BASED ON SEASONAL
THERMAL HISTORY (Abstract ID: 28052)

PAST WATER ENVIRONMENT OF KABIRA BAY RECORDED BY ISOTOPES AND
TRACE ELEMENTS OF CORAL SKELETON (Abstract ID: 29217 | Poster ID: 232)
Kabira bay, which locates in Ishigaki Island, Okinawa, Japan is known as one of the most
beautiful coral reef in Okinawa. In recent years, local people feel that turbidity in Kabira
bay is getting higher because of some environmental pollutions such as a runoff of red
clay, a culture of pearl oyster and a tourism of glass boat. It is important to investigate
the past water environment in the Kabira bay to distinguish recent turbidity level from
the past and identify the source of the pollution and the initiation time for a future
management of the bay. In this study, we analyzed the isotopes of δ18O and δ13C and
some trace metals in coral skeleton, and reconstructed the water environment in Kabira
bay past 50 years. Oxygen isotope ratio decreases in summer and increases in winter.
Temperature dependence was -0.125 ‰/°C in the mouth of the bay, -0.173‰/°C in
the center, -0.106 ‰/°C in the closed-off section of the bay. A result of these values is
showed a significant decrease since 2000 at samples taken from a closed-off section of
the bay. This result indicates the possible effect of some pollutants to deteriorate a light
environment for coral photosynthesis. Trace metals, such as Mn, Al and Sn, increased
from 1976 after the reversion of Okinawa to Japan, indicating the rapid developments
on land around Kabira bay.

Corals and their microbial symbionts could resist thermal stresses and acclimated to
thermal fluctuations. However, the effects of temperature fluctuation and seasonal
acclimation on coral-associated bacteria remain unclear. To investigate this question,
we conducted coral incubation experiments with different temperature treatments.
Coral samples were collected at Penghu Islands in Taiwan. Seawater temperature of
the sampling site ranged from 12.1 to 23.1 °C in winter and 23.4 to 30.2 °C in summer.
the changes in coral-associated bacteria were detected at three time points for each
tank. The partial 16S rRNA sequences were used to identify composition of bacterial
communities using Illumina sequencing. Bacterial communities between seasons were
different in compositions and dominant species. For different temperature treatments,
the dominant bacteria were gradually altered during incubations. Interestingly, such the
shifting occurred in the corals collected in winter required longer and lower temperature
treatments than in summer. Besides, the change in Endozoicomonas , health-associated
bacteria, showed a similar shifting pattern. In short, changes in coral-associated bacteria
presented a new evidence to suggest that seasonal acclimation may increase the coral
resistance to thermal fluctuation.


EGG FORMATION OF A STONY CORAL, EUPHYLLIA ANCORA (CNIDARIA,
Sexual reproduction of stony corals has been studied in many species worldwide.
Although various aspects of sexual reproduction, such as spawning, sexuality, and
gametogenesis, were extensively investigated during the past three decades, the intrinsic
mechanisms of sexual reproduction remain almost unknown. To gain a better understanding of coral gametogenesis at both the molecular and cellular levels, as a first step,
we focused on the oogenesis of a stony coral Euphyllia ancora, and investigated 1) what
kind of molecules are mainly accumulated in the coral eggs, and 2) how these molecules
are formed in the coral body during the oogenesis. We found that the coral possesses
at least 3 types of yolk proteins, namely, Vitellogenin (Vg), Egg protein (Ep), and Euphy.
Analysis of tissue distribution by quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated that these yolk
proteins were highly expressed in the ovarian tissues. Subsequent mRNA in situhybridization demonstrated that mRNA of these 3 yolk proteins were present in ovarian somatic
cells adjacent to oocytes. Immunohistochemical analyses with anti-Vg, Ep, or Euphy
antibodies showed the immunoreactivities of these 3 yolk proteins in both oocytes and
ovarian somatic cells. These results demonstrated that the ovarian somatic cells, but not
the oocytes themselves, synthesize these 3 yolk proteins in the ovarian tissues. Thus, yolk
proteins produced in the ovarian somatic cells would be transported to the oocytes. Our
data provide new information that contribute to a more comprehensive understanding
of coral egg formation.

MODELING THE IMPACTS OF SEA-LEVEL RISE AND CHANGING WAVE CONDITIONS ON ATOLL ISLANDS: INSIGHT FROM WAKE AND MIDWAY ATOLLS,
NORTHWESTERN HAWAIIAN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29706 | Poster ID: 403)
Low-lying atoll islands are dynamic landforms experiencing changing erosion and
accretion patterns due to changes in waves and sea level. These changes can threaten
infrastructure and island communities via increased run-up, flooding, and loss of inhabitable area. To enable managers to implement effective mitigation and resiliency efforts, it
is critical to understand how climate change will drive alongshore variations in flooding
and erosion/accretion patterns. A Delft 3D model and empirical formulations were used
to investigate potential climate change effects at two atolls in the Northwestern Hawaiian
Islands, Wake and Midway. Using winter and summer end-member wave conditions,
different scenarios were modeled by varying sea level at intervals between 0.0 to +2.0
m, incident wave heights from –0.3 to +0.3 m, and incident wave directions from –15.0°
to +15.0° relative to current conditions. The results indicate that the greatest magnitude
changes are along ocean-facing shorelines, primarily where the reef flat is narrowest.
However, the portions most vulnerable to sea-level rise and changing wave conditions
are the alongshore (longitudinal) ends of islands and the lagoon-facing shorelines, with
each displaying the greatest proportional change in erosion and wave-driven run-up, and
large heterogeneity between atolls. Together, these results suggest that the ends of atoll
islands and lagoon shorelines will be most impacted by projected climate change and
management decisions should take these potential changes into account when planning
future investments.



ARE SUCCESSFUL REEF FISH SIMPLY BORN ‘LUCKY’ OR DO THEY ‘PLAY
THEIR CARDS WELL’? (Abstract ID: 28027)
Biology is the story of winners and losers; winners survive better, produce more
offspring, and thus differentially contribute to population growth. Like any game, timing
is paramount -- winners may be born at the right time. Indeed, in the face of uncertainty,
parents can spread out reproductive timing, but this bet-hedging will stack the deck in fa-

SOURCES OF VIBRIO CORALLIILYTICUS STRAIN OCN008 IN KANEOHE BAY,
HAWAII AND THE EFFECT OF DECREASED SALINITY ON INFECTION OF THE
CORAL, MONTIPORA CAPITATA (Abstract ID: 28967)

317

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

a Siderastrea siderea colony in the Golfo de Ana Maria, in the Southern Cuban coast.
This core represents the first long core ever collected in Cuban waters. We present high
framework for greater understanding of past and future climate variability. This research
also exemplifies the opportunities now available from bilateral collaborations between
Cuban and American scientists.

Identifying sources of coral pathogens and understanding environmental risk factors is
important for predicting and mitigating coral disease outbreaks. In Hawaii, Montipora
White Syndrome (MWS) is a tissue loss disease with numerous outbreaks occurring in
Kaneohe Bay during the winter when heavy rain events are more common. The bacterium, Vibrio coralliilyticus strain OCN008, has been shown to cause acute tissue loss
for the presence of OCN008. In addition, manipulative experiments were conducted to
determine if decreased salinity increased disease risk for corals by reducing the amount
of bacteria needed to cause infections. OCN008 was detected in freshwater and several
marine organisms, including gobies, corallivorous butterflyfish, coral-associated invertebrates, and the coral host (Montipora capitata). Manipulative experiments showed that
exposure to decreased salinity did not create lesions in corals but the decreased salinity
allowed OCN008 infections to occur at a lower dose (106 cell/mL vs. 108 cells/mL).
OCN008 was found in multiple biotic and abiotic sources in Kaneohe Bay, suggesting
that corals have many opportunities for exposure to this pathogen. We also found that
insight for predicting disease outbreaks in Kaneohe Bay.


SANTA CRUZ CABRALIA REEFS, BAHIA BRAZIL: USING DIGITAL TOOLS AND
PRINTED MEDIA TO RAISE CONSERVATION AWARENESS IN K-12 EDUCATION
(Abstract ID: 29121)
Brazilian coasts have the only coral reefs of the South Atlantic, and reefs are in relative
good condition. Southern Bahia is home to the largest and most biodiverse reef systems
