and the coastal reefs of Santa Cruz Cabralia are intensely visited, but still poorly studied.
Coral Vivo (“Living Coral”) carried out physical mapping and partnered with the K-12
Terezinha Scaramussa State School in an environmental education activity, where
students interviewed elder fishermen, many their own relatives, to learn the names of
different areas on the reefs. Reef names were about to be lost, as traditional fishing loses
importance. Students then christened areas not mentioned. Place names were identified
over a WorldView-2 satellite image, which has a 1.85 m pixel for the 6 bands of the
visible electromagnetic spectrum fused to 0.46 m resolution pixels of the pan-chromatic
band. Imagery was geo-referenced in detail, and the public easily recognized sites. A
bathymetry survey was conducted along an 800 km course, consisting of 175 parallel
lines 4.5 km long, spaced 100 m. 3,253,013 sounding points, spaced roughly every 0.6
m, were corrected for tidal variations and interpolated into a digital bathymetry model
that indicates the relief of the seabed, showing reef morphologies and depth. As a result,
a printed poster depicting names, imagery, and relief, with 3-D views featuring depths
represented by a color scale was created and distributed to public schools of Southern


MESOSCALE EDDIES INCREASE LARVAL GROWTH AND SHAPE PATTERNS OF
MORTALITY AND RECRUITMENT IN CORAL REEF FISHES (Abstract ID: 29746)
Like most benthic marine organisms, coral reef fishes produce larvae that traverse open
ocean waters before settling and metamorphosing into juveniles. Where larvae are transported and how they survive is a central question in marine and fisheries ecology. While
there is increasing success in modeling larval trajectories, our knowledge of the physical
and biological processes contributing to larval survivorship during dispersal remains
relatively poor. Mesoscale eddies, ubiquitous throughout the world’s oceans, can exhibit
increased productivity in addition to providing a mechanism for retention, suggesting
they may serve as important larval habitat. Yet there is a lack of empirical data on
growth and survival of larvae associated with these features. We sampled larvae of five
coral reef fishes inside and outside of mesoscale eddies and, for three species, tracked
cohorts from the plankton to nearshore reefs. Otolith microstructure analysis revealed
that four of five species of reef fish examined had consistently faster growth inside of
eddies. Additionally, in comparisons of young and old age groups,Thalassoma bifasciatum
exhibited trait-based selection that varied spatially and temporally. Importantly, larvae
but also preferentially survived to settlement. These results indicate that larvae retained
in mesoscale eddies likely contribute disproportionately to population replenishment.
Successful dispersal in oligotrophic waters may rely on larval encounter with such
oceanographic features.


IN SITU TEMPERATURE PROFILE OF SHALLOW REEF COMMUNITIES IN NEGROS AND APO ISLAND: 2013-2014 (Abstract ID: 28847 | Poster ID: 352)
Coral reefs provide a wide variety of ecosystem services and goods that benefit humankind. However, the survival and health of reefs are threatened by natural and anthropogenic factors such as climate change and pollution. Increased seawater temperature
often results in bleaching of certain coral species. This study aimed at profiling in situ
2013 to February 2014 using data loggers programmed to record hourly. Results for Apo
showed temperature peaks in the months of May, June and July 2013. For Sibulan site,
peaks were observed in May, June and September 2013. Lowest temperature for both
sites was observed in February 2014. Comparison with satellite-derived sea surface
temperatures (SST) for the Bohol Sea indicated Apo Island recorded lower temperatures
by 0.5 to 1.5 °C except for the months of October, November and December whereas
in Sibulan site, logger-derived temperature recordings were mostly higher by 0.5 °C in
the months of March, May, October, November, December 2013, and February 2014.
Between sites, variation may be explained by differences in coastal profiles, depths of
reefs and influences of different water current systems. Variation from satellite-derived
data may be due to depth differences since the latter are taken only from the surface.
Continuous in situ temperature monitoring is recommended as it provides a more localized profile especially in this period of changing climate.


SEA SURFACE SALINITY VARIABILITY AND PALEOCLIMATE RECONSTRUCTIONS IN CUBA INFERRED FROM CORAL ARAGONITE d18O, d13C AND SR/CA
(Abstract ID: 30100 | Poster ID: 7)
Coral geochemical records such as stable isotopic compositions and elemental ratios
can provide high-resolution records of past climatic conditions and variability. Such
records can elucidate our understanding of climate variability over timescales ranging
from inter-annual to centennial, documenting variability associated with seasonality as
well as phenomena such as the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). Coral paleoceanographic reconstructions are of particular value in the Atlantic basin because of the
paucity of data currently available. In Cuba, the largest island in the Caribbean, there
is limited instrumental data and limited knowledge of multi-decadal climate sensitivity.
Cuba is also an interesting site to study seasonal variations in corals because the annual
SST range is high and its shallow platform exhibits high salinity and density gradients.
Here we present new results from a 227 year coral core collected in February 2015 from


DIVING INTO THE DEEP-END: BAITED REMOTE UNDERWATER VIDEO STATIONS (BRUVS) TO STUDY DEEP-REEF FISH IN THE GREAT BARRIER REEF,
AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 28024)
Underwater video has great utility to study harder to sample areas such as deeper reefs.
Baited Remote Underwater Video Stations (BRUVS) and multi-beam bathymetry were

318

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


used to investigate deep-reef fish communities off the continental slope in the Great
Barrier Reef, Australia. BRUVS were deployed between 50-300m and fish species richness and diversity were recorded using Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS)
software. There were significant differences in fish assemblages across depths, with
different dominant families and groups of species characterising broad depth categories.
For the particular reefs studied, multi-beam habitat derivatives such as depth, rugosity
and slope were correlated with higher species diversity and greater abundance. This
study resulted in novel records for fish species recorded elsewhere in the Indo-Pacific at
similar depths and also identified potential new species. BRUVS have proved useful as a
fishery-independent method to survey fish communities, to identify potential “hot-spots”
of biological diversity and new species, and to explore surprisingly diverse deep reefs.


VIRUSES AS RESERVOIRS OF BACTERIAL VIRULENCE GENES IN CORAL REEFS
(Abstract ID: 28845)
Marine viruses significantly impact microbial diversity and function through predation
and gene transfer. The responses of coral reef bacterial communities to anthropogenic
disturbance will be, therefore, tightly liked to viral community dynamics in these systems.
Here we investigated genetic diversity of viral assemblages in the Abrolhos Bank
coral reefs, the largest reef system in the South Atlantic, currently undergoing benthic
phase-shifts, bleaching and disease outbreaks. Most of the bacteriophage sequences
in the viromes had high similarity with phages implicated in lysogenic conversion of
their hosts. One of the most abundant genes waslom, lambda outer membrane protein,
which is known to confer pathogenicity to Enterobacteria. Analysis of assembled contigs
containing the lom gene indicate that its high abundance is not due to dominance of one
single viral strain containing the gene, instead, lom is found in the genomes of many different phage strains. We provide evidence that this gene is being laterally transferred and
positively selected within the bacterial community. Lysogenic conversion of symbionts
associated to coral reef organisms could be the cause of disease outbreaks observed
in reefs around the globe, a well-known mechanism in human pathogens such asVibrio
cholera and recently proposed in the coral pathogen Vibrio coralliitycus.


MONITORING SEDIMENTATION AND SEDIMENT ACCUMMULATION RATES
FOR PROTECTION OF CORAL REEFS IN COASTAL WATERS (Abstract ID: 28798)
Sediment accumulation rates are essential tools for the understanding of processes
related to the deposition of organic and inorganic materials in aquatic environments.
They are useful for paleo-environmental reconstructions of climate history or for biotic
evolution as seen in the fossil record, and for the functioning of benthic organisms. The
isotope method, based on analysis of changes in 210Pb activity in the sediment profile
from the coastal waters of the Niger Delta was deployed and Sediment Accumulation
Rates calculated using the Constant flux. The Constant Sedimentation Rate, CSR model
for isotopic methods was used and age of sediment layers determined using the Constant Rate of Supply, CRS model. This model assumes a constant flux of 210Pb from
decay of atmospheric 222Rn followed by adsorption on suspended particulates that
carry the 210Pb to estuarine sediment at constant rate. Sedimentation rates estimated
from the excess 210Pb profiles of the cores ranged from 0.04 g/cm2/yr before 1976
to 0.16 g/cm2/yr after 1976. Sediment accumulation rates showed minimal variation
between 1930 and 1970 but became unstable in the region with leaps from the 1980s reflecting the heightened oil production activities. This has since been exacerbated by the
disappearing mangrove. Prediction of possible reclamation of most of the littoral waters
of the regions was made and its possible consequences on ecosytem coral reef health
are discussed with recommendations for integrated coastal zone management. Key
words: Sedimentation rate, Bonny Estuary, Ecological consequences, Paleo-environment,
Constant Rate of Supply Model, Coastal Management


LARVAL DEVELOPMENT AND RECRUITMENT IN PTEROGORGIA GUADALUPENSIS UNDER ACIDIFICATION CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 29960 | Poster ID: 198)
Although we understand the effects of ocean acidification on adult populations of
octocorals, little is known about its effects on the early life stages. For octocorals,
there is evidence of resilience against ocean acidification under mesocosms conditions but the effects on larval development and recruitment are unknown. In this
study, we grew larvae of the brooder gorgonian coral from the Caribbean Pterogorgia
guadalupensis(Gorgonidae: Octocorallia) under laboratory conditions and bred the larvae
to follow their complete development and metamorphosis through the polyp stage,
under acidification conditions. We describe the life history of this octocoral, follow its development rates and survival, and finally, evaluate 1) larval recruitment under decreased
pH conditions and 2) larval preferences and affinity for two settlement surfaces including
coralline red algae and dead gorgonian axis. Treatments with decreased pH conditions
did not affect significantly either larvae survival or the development processes, but they
did affect recruitment and settlement rates. We found high preferences of the larvae for
coralline red algae as settlement surface, showing that it significantly improves larval
overcoming this effect and produce greater numbers of successful polyp recruits.


SCALING UP FROM ORGANISMS TO ECOSYSTEM: INDIVIDUAL AND COMBINED COMMUNITY METABOLIC RESPONSES OF FOUR DISTINCT BENTHIC
ASSEMBLAGES TO NUTRIENT ADDITION (Abstract ID: 29062)
Reef metabolism experiments are useful for understanding the net ecosystem response
of coral reefs to environmental change; however, relating community response to
organismal response is challenging. To scale up from organisms to ecosystems, reef
metabolism experiments often extrapolate a community response by adding metabolic
rates together from individual incubations; an additive design that assumes that the
functional relationship between each organism and the environment must be the same.
Using a nutrient addition experiment, we measured the impact of elevated nitrate (N)
and phosphate (P) on metabolic rates of individual taxa and combined reef communities
to test if the relationship between individual and community metabolism is indeed additive. Our reef community consisted of the dominant substrate types found on coral reefs:
macroalgae, coral, reef rubble, and sediment. We performed a nutrient press experiment,
delivering elevated N and P at a constant rate using peristaltic pumps to three different
nutrient concentrations: ambient (N = 0.12 µM, P = 0.05 µM), elevated (N = 2.21µM, P
= 0.93 µM), and highly elevated (N = 5.54 µM, P = 1.89 µM). After a 6-week acclimation
period, we calculated net ecosystem calcification, net community production, nutrient
uptake, and pH feedbacks from the substrates as individuals and as mixed communities
over two sequential 24-hour incubation periods. Our results will help us understand how
reef organisms and communities respond to eutrophication as well as help to elucidate
the scaling of metabolic rates from reef organisms to communities.


MONITORING ALGAL DIVERSITY IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC: A CASE STUDY
ON ACTINOTRICHIA (Abstract ID: 29986 | Poster ID: 50)
Introduced algae are an important focus of resource managers because of their potential
to become invasive and have devastating impacts on reef ecosystems. To assess the risk
of introducing non-indigenous marine species (NIMS) and monitor those already present, an understanding of the current diversity and distribution of the flora is required.
Traditional (morphological) identification can be expensive and often inaccurate,
but recent genetic techniques – like DNA barcoding - provide fast and cost-effective
methods for algae identification and cryptic species recognition. In this study, we use the
red algal genus Actinotrichia Decaisne to examine algae species diversity in Micronesia
and the western Pacific. Sequence analysis using the mitochondrial marker COI-5P and
plastid marker rbcL indicates a high degree of cryptic diversity in Actinotrichia, with two
new and undescribed species present in Micronesia’s flora alone, and potentially many
more throughout the Indo-Pacific. These results suggest the marine flora of these regions
is substantially more diverse than currently recognized, and further study of this diversity
will aid resource managers in monitoring NIMS and potentially harmful invasive species.

319

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


selection of “compatible”Symbiodinium types. These proteins share the canonical ficolin
structure, containing terminal collagen- and fibrinogen-like domains, and are exceptional
for the presence of central tandem immunoglobulin domains. Given the absence of these
proteins in bilaterians, they have been named Cnidarian Ficolin-Like proteins (CniFLs).
Interestingly, CniFLs have so far been identified only in symbiotic cnidarians and their gene
expression inAiptasia is differentially regulated upon symbiosis establishment, suggesting a
role of CniFLs in Symbiodinium recognition and uptake. The present work aims to elucidate
the putative CniFLs–associated complement pathway that mediates the uptake of Symbiodinium in Aiptasia. To this end, we use targeted-proteomic approaches to identify putative
CniFLs-binding molecules exposed on the Symbiodinium surface and detailed biophysical
characterization to investigate the nature of the interactions.

TROPHIC SPECTRUM ANALYSIS OF REEF FISHES IN TWINROCKS MARINE
SANCTUARY, NORTHERN VERDE ISLAND PASSAGE, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID:
28639 | Poster ID: 635)
Against the backdrop of increasing disturbances due to human-dominated environments, coral reef ecosystems are in constant threat. One useful method in defining the
health of coral reefs is through trophic spectrum analysis of reef fish community. This
method shows the distribution of reef fish assemblage to a continuum of trophic fractions, which can indicate the structure and functioning of aquatic ecosystems in a fisheries context. This study aims to identify the effects of coral reef protection to the trophic
spectrum of its associated fish assemblage. In the study, Twin Rocks Marine Sanctuary
of the North Calumpang Peninsula was monitored for seven months. Standard fish
visual census, coupled with benthic phototransect method was conducted on established
permanent transects. Overall, there was a total of 236 species under 38 families of
reef fishes observed throughout the duration of the monitoring period. For each species identified, fractional trophic levels were assigned based on their classification in
inside the marine sanctuary. This difference was most evident for herbivores and mobile
invertebrate feeders, which were mostly commercially important reef fishes in the study
site. Furthermore, there were more facultative piscivores and schooling reef fishes inside
the reserve compared to its adjacent outside boundary. The results showed the utility of
trophic spectrum analysis in reflecting the benefits of protecting coral reef areas.


GLOBAL FINPRINT: THE FIRST GLOBAL SURVEY OF SHARKS AND RAYS ON
CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 29112)
Over the past half century there has been a substantial decline in the abundance of
sharks on many of the world’s coral reefs. Fishing has been the main cause of this
decline, with the proximity of human communities often identified as a key risk factor
for these declines. The ad hoc reporting of declines and the use of a range of sampling
techniques, has limited our understanding of the magnitude of the declines and the
appropriate conservation responses. To provide a clear picture of the global status of
sharks associated with coral reefs the Global FinPrint project was established in 2015.
The project is using new and existing baited remote underwater video (BRUV) data
to examine the diversity and abundance of sharks and rays at hundreds of coral reef
locations in the Pacific, Indian and Atlantic Oceans. This presentation will describe the
objectives, sampling design, opportunities for partners and intended outcomes of the
project. An update on the first year of sampling will be provided.



FITTING A PIECE IN THE SOUTH ATLANTIC PUZZLE: SEAMOUNTS AS
STEPPING-STONES BETWEEN MAINLAND AND OCEANIC ISLANDS (Abstract
ID: 28468)

SOUNDTRACK OF THE ANTHROPOCENE: IMPACTS OF GLOBAL CHANGE ON
LARVAL RECRUITMENT IN THE 21ST CENTURY (Abstract ID: 28369)

The puzzling pattern that arises from the disjunct distribution of tropical reef fishes in
the South Atlantic indicates that stepping-stone habitats are not required for oceanwide dispersal, but they may be important for short routes between oceanic islands
and mainland. Trindade and Martin Vaz, 1,200 km off the Brazilian coast, are the only
exposed peaks of a volcanic ridge, the Vitória-Trindade Chain (VTC), and show high
species richness when compared to other remote islands of the Atlantic. The seamounts
of the VTC, which summits today are in mesophotic depths (average 50 m), have been
suggested to serve as stepping-stones between the continental shelf and the islands. A
comparative phylogeographic approach was used to understand the role of seamounts
for fish diversity on islands, helping solve the South Atlantic puzzle. Two reef fishes collected throughout the VTC were analyzed for both mtDNA (cytochrome b and control
region) and nDNA (8-12 microsatellite loci) markers. Populations from the continental
shelf and seamounts have undergone severe bottlenecks associated to habitat loss
during glacial low sea level stands, while those from the islands apparently experienced
more stable conditions. A clear signal of isolation by distance was found in the species
with lower dispersal ability, evidencing that seamounts are important for increasing the
reef fish richness on the remote islands. A biodiversity feedback, controlled by sea level
fluctuations, was identified amongst islands, seamounts and mainland, showing that
peripheral locations are not evolutionary graveyards.

In early life, the vast majority of coral reef organisms face four major tests that together
determine dispersal, survival and population replenishment. Since larvae generally
develop away from reef habitat, once sufficiently well developed to leave open water
environments, they must locate reefs, select suitable habitat, settle at locations with sufficient shelter, and avoid the immediate attention of many voracious predators. Over the
past 15 years we have discovered the importance of the natural soundscape (combined
with other cues) for guiding fish, crustacean and coral larvae towards reefs while allowing
them to avoid predation. Reef noise is generated by the resident community, so reefs
sound characteristically different and sound indicates the composition of the community and quality of the habitat, enabling larvae to locate and settle into appropriate
microhabitat. But we live in an era of global change, with overfishing and pollution compromising reef quality, rising levels of atmospheric CO2 causing ocean acidification, and
the noise of motorboats, ships, offshore industry and naval operations modifying natural
soundscapes. Our recent work demonstrates that ocean acidification can affect auditory
behaviour of larvae, and that motorboat noise can affect orientation and settlement in
larval fish, and behaviour, physiology and survival of newly-settled reef fish. Following
a summary of these studies, I will conclude with discussion of ways in which we may
mitigate the impacts of global change on larval recruitment in the 21st century.



BIOGEOGRAPHY OF DINOFLAGELLATE SYMBIONTS ACROSS THE INDOPACIFIC: AN ECOLOGICAL AND EVOLUTIONARY ANALYSIS (Abstract ID: 28508
| Poster ID: 77)

THE ROLE OF CNIDARIAN FICOLIN-LIKE PROTEINS IN SYMBIODINIUMRECOGNITION AND UPTAKE (Abstract ID: 27980)

Biogeographic studies have shown that the dinoflagellate symbionts (Symbiodinium)
that inhabit corals exhibit variation in distribution across both broad geographical and
local scales. Moreover, modern molecular techniques revealed that Symbiodinium
types within a single clade differ in traits such as host specificity, niche diversification,
physiology or bleaching susceptibility. This has provoked the need for further investigations into the distribution and evolutionary patterns of Symbiodinium at fine taxonomic
scales, particularly in congruence with coral host and environmental data since both are

Coral reefs depend upon the functional symbiosis between a cnidarian animal host, the
coral, and its intracellular photosynthetic dinoflagellate in the genus Symbiodinium. Understanding cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis has been the effort of decade-long research, yet
the molecular principles governing this association are still largely undescribed. The recent
sequencing of the genome of the sea anemone Aiptasia revealed a highly promising set of
proteins that might function through the lectin-complement pathway and contribute to the
320

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Increasing human development and activity around tropical coastlines exposes coral
reefs to a host of local stressors (overfishing, sedimentation, nutrification), which act
synergistically to decrease coral cover, health, and recruitment, while encouraging the
growth and proliferation of macroalgae. Contact with macroalgae has been shown to
cause coral bleaching, disease, and reduced growth and fecundity through shading, abrasion, oxidative stress, allelopathic interactions and alteration of the coral microbiome.
Few studies have investigated the stress response of corals in chronic contact with algae,
and none have used molecular methods to do so. This study focuses on finger coral
(Porites compressa) colonies in naturally occurring, chronic contact with the invasive
red carrageenophyte alga, Kappaphycus alvarezii, on patch reefs in Kaneohe Bay, Oahu,
Hawaii. Shotgun proteome sequencing, targeted immunoblotting, and enzyme activity
study demonstrates the use of molecular methods in identifying and characterizing stress
in outwardly healthy corals, allowing for more proactive management of at-risk coral
reef ecosystems, and lays the foundation for understanding mechanisms of acclimation
and resilience to algae-induced stress. Comparison with the stress profiles of corals
experimentally exposed to acute algal contact stress will provide further insight into
ecologically relevant coral stress responses.

considered equally important driving factors for Symbiodinium diversity and speciation.
We assembled a database of several thousand occurrences of Symbiodinium at the
sub-clade level from across the Indo-Pacific that included environmental data, symbiont
sequence data, symbiont host data and host trait data. We investigated how environmental factors in combination with evolutionary processes and ecological traits structure
present day Symbiodinium species assemblages and influence their distribution across
the Indo-Pacific. Furthermore, we tested whether biogeographic breaks in Symbiodinium
sub-clades are concordant with current understanding of Indo-Pacific coral faunal
breaks, evolutionary processes and community composition, providing insight into the
ecological and evolutionary patterns of these symbiotic partners.

GROUNDWATER-MEDIATED ANTHROPOGENIC NUTRIENT INPUTS TO A
NEAR-SHORE REEF ON BERMUDA (Abstract ID: 30039 | Poster ID: 456)


Groundwater discharge is increasingly recognized as a source of nutrient pollution to
coastal reefs around the world, but much has yet to be learned of the extent and severity
of its effects on water quality and reef ecology. Most of the sewage generated by Bermuda’s 65,000 residents (national population density of 1,200 people/km2, third-highest
in the world) enters the groundwater through untreated cesspits. Despite extreme nutrient loading in the groundwater, the impact of groundwater discharge on Bermuda’s coral
reefs has been little studied. We surveyed submarine groundwater discharge on a patch
reef, 0-30m from shore, in Tynes Bay, adjacent to a large groundwater lens. Temperature,
salinity, pH, and alkalinity were monitored at the discharge site, on the adjacent reef, and
30m from shore. Groundwater discharge, characterized by low salinity, high alkalinity,
elevated nitrogen concentrations (500µM NO3– + NO2–, 2.5µM NH4+) and an elevated
15N/14N ratio (δ15N=10.9‰) consistent with inputs of human waste, was strongly
linked with rainfall and tidal cycles. On the adjacent patch reef, NO3- + NO2- averaged
5µM, 10 times higher than typical in central Tynes Bay. Despite this heavy localized
nutrient loading, coral calcification rates and percent live coral cover on the patch reef
are relatively high, and bioerosion rates are lower than they are on Pacific reefs with
comparable nutrient concentrations. Understanding reef community functionality
under these conditions is critical to the design of reef management strategies in densely
populated areas.

DEVELOPING A NOAA CORAL GENOMIC OBSERVATORY NETWORK (CGON):
PRELIMINARY METAGENOMIC PILOT STUDIES AND CGON DEVELOPMENT
PLANS (Abstract ID: 29763)
NOAA is in the early stages of developing a “Coral Genomic Observatory Network”
(CGON) to complement the NOAA “Integrated Coral Observing Network” (ICON). This
new CGON initiative intends to establish observatories in critical coral reef ecosystems for meta-’omic characterization of community DNA and RNA for functional and
taxonomic genes of both coral and its holobiont microbiomes. CGON research seeks to
better understand resilience and adaptation of corals to climate-related and anthropogenic stress, such as temperature, nutrients, and disease stressors. The early phase of
this CGON initiative focuses on selected sentinel reef sites in the Florida Keys National
Marine Sanctuary, in the urbanized coastal waters of SE Florida, and in “relatively
pristine” waters of Little Cayman, allowing comparisons of reefs with high direct anthropogenic influence and a reef with minimal direct anthropogenic influence. A small-scale
preliminary pilot study in advance of CGON was conducted (and is reported here) for 4
sentinel reef sites in the urbanized coastal waters of Miami-Dade and Broward Counties
(Florida, USA). This pilot study only represents 16S bacterial taxonomic metagenomics,
rather than full meta-’omic characterization, for two species of coral, as well as qPCRbased microbial source tracking of fecal indicating bacteria, for these coral reefs and for
coastal inlets and wastewater outfalls impacting them. The CGON initiative is expected
to enhance the genetic information for these sites and to eventually expand such characterization to other reefs around the world.


SOCOTRA: THE NEW HYBRID HOTSPOT (Abstract ID: 28304 | Poster ID: 37)
Areas where closely related species of reef fish from different biogeographical regions
come into contact and interbreed to form hybrids are known as suture zones. Here we
characterise a previously unknown suture zone in the Western Indian Ocean at the
Socotra Archipelago (Yemen), where fish fauna from the Red Sea, Gulf of Aden, Arabian
Sea, and greater Indo-Polynesian province intersect. The rate of hybrid discovery at
Socotra (based on the number of dives and areas explored per hybrid crosses detected)
surpasses that recorded elsewhere in the tropical marine environment. Here we present
morphological, behavioural and genetic evidence of hybridisation involving 14 species of
reef fish. We suggest that a unique combination of; location at the intersection of multiple
biogeographic provinces, abundant reef habitat, fluctuating environmental conditions,
and differences in sister species abundance are responsible for the level of hybridisation
reported in Socotra. Given our limited search time, we predict that the extent of hybridisation occurring at Socotra will ultimately be even greater than reported here, highlighting
the prospect of Socotra as a producer or genetic novelty and new diversity.


In the Northwestern Pacific, the Kuroshio Current supplies warm tropical water to the
Ryukyu Archipelago in Japan providing good conditions for a high diversity of coral
species. However, as for most coral reefs worldwide, the biodiversity of Japanese mesophotic corals remains virtually unknown. Here we report the preliminary observations
of the coral distribution and diversity at several sites along the archipelago at depths
from 30 down to 100 m. The coral cover and community structure were estimated using
photoquadrats, while detailed coral identification was based on morphological and
molecular examination of samples. An important diversity of distinct coral communities was found throughout the archipelago combined with high coral species diversity.
Coral coverage is usually low, although occasionally, coral coverage can be nearly total.
However, the highest coral coverage was usually associated with low species diversity.


DETECTION OF MOLECULAR STRESS RESPONSE IN CORALS EXPERIENCING
CHRONIC CONTACT WITH INVASIVE ALGAE MATS (Abstract ID: 29794)

321

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Leptoseris, the emblematic mesophotic coral genus, dominated communities mainly
in protected bays of the Southern part of the archipelago. Other communities were
corallimorphs). Except for the Leptoseris-dominated communities, most of the dense
coral communities were found only from one location. This suggests that not only MCEs
in the Ryukyu Archipelago are very diverse both at species and community level, but
also that this diversity is still largely underexplored. We will discuss the significance of
these findings in a conservation perspective.
com

THE DAWNING OF THE MESOPHOTIC REEF RESEARCH IN THE PHILIPPINES
(Abstract ID: 29059 | Poster ID: 326)

FROM MESOCOSM EXPERIMENTS TO SATELLITES: IMPLEMENTING THE

The Philippines has among the largest and most biodiverse reef areas in the world. However, most of its shallow reefs outside marine protected areas have gradually declined
over the decades while its mesophotic reefs at depths of 30–150 m have scarcely been
studied. In this study, six sites from different parts of the Philippines were surveyed for
documentation of the occurrence of coral ecosystems at the upper mesophotic depths.
Multibeam and side scan sonars were used to map the sea floor and to identify sites
for SCUBA dives, drop-camera and ROV surveys to identify biodiversity and ecological
patterns. These provided an initial inventory of corals and fishes, information on the
locations of high biodiversity, and emergent patterns on the differences between shallow
and mesophotic reef communities. Here we present a synthesis of the initial results
of the first nationwide mesophotic exploration in the Philippines and a framework of
management of mesophotic coral reef resources.

The world’s only global operational satellite product designed specifically to monitor
coral bleaching thermal stress is the HotSpot product suite, developed by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Coral Reef Watch (CRW) program.
These products help coral reef managers map and monitor heat stress remotely and
hence better understand and predict mass coral bleaching. Although these products
perform quite well when used to describe the onset of bleaching, they provide only
indicative measures of the severity, duration and associated mortality of a bleaching
event. They also do not separate the different responses of various coral genera, which
is increasingly important as the mix of genera on reefs continually alters due to the loss
of less tolerant genera via past stress events. The HotSpot product suite is based only on
sea surface temperature (SST). However, we now know that mass coral bleaching results
from the combined effect of temperature and light and that bleaching response varies
between genera. Here we describe a major evolution of the NOAA CRW satellite products. Called the Light Stress Damage (LSD) product suite, it combines satellite-derived
SST and solar insolation data to provide improved measures of stress to coral health.
The LSD is designed to provide an improved prediction of the severity and mortality
associated with bleaching events and should also provide a more accurate measure of
the onset and end of a coral stress event. It also will allow for measurement of different
bleaching responses between genera.


RESPONDING TO FISH EXTIRPATIONS IN THE GLOBAL MARINE BIODIVERSITY EPICENTRE (Abstract ID: 28060)


The Philippines lie in the global marine biodiversity epicentre but the ecological footprint
of their reef fishing is fourth highest among island nations. Fisheries landings are declining, yet the status of the most vulnerable species is scarcely known. Localised species
extinctions have been detected at Bohol Island but wider survey effort has been lacking.
This is the first multidisciplinary study of national scope to identify species at risk of
extirpation, using local and scientific knowledge to accurately infer declines in this
data-poor setting. Semi-structured interviews to capture fishers’ knowledge and identify
declining reef species were followed by well-replicated UVC in 5 marine KBAs, targeting
shallow water fishery target species reported to have disappeared from catches between
the 1950s and 2014. Five species suffered a decline in CPUE of 64-88%: bumphead
parrotfish, humphead wrasse, African pompano, giant grouper and mangrove red snapper. They were also absent from the UVC surveys, in addition to 6 other target species.
Fishing pressure was not a factor but massive coral and complexity were predictors of
spatial variation in the assemblage. The dramatic declines in CPUE over several decades
and the absence of 21% of the target species in UVC data indicate a substantial prior
decline in target populations. Contrasting patterns in fish presence/absence between
fishers’ catch and UVC data underline the importance of using multiple methods to
accurately assess past changes in and current status of populations.

BUTTERFLYFISHES EXHIBIT SPECIES-SPECIFIC RESPONSES TO CHANGES IN
PACIFIC SOFT CORAL COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 28189)
Many butterflyfish species exhibit feeding preferences for scleractinian corals that
represent a continuum from facultative to obligate strategies, and which affect their
predicted responses to temporal and spatial changes in coral community structure. Less
frequently studied are interactions between butterflyfishes and soft corals, even though
the latter represent significant habitat and energetic resources on Indo-Pacific coral reefs.
We examined changes to the benthic community structure of three disjunct back-reef
communities on the leeward side of Guam over two decades. These communities
include a reef that has remained stable and relatively pristine through time, a reef that
was significantly impaired but has stabilized over time, and a reef that has experienced
a shifting baseline in response to anthropogenic and natural disturbances during this period. Benthic community structure, including soft corals, was monitored from 1994-2014.
Density and behavior of six species of butterflyfishes, including an obligate hard coral
specialist, two soft coral specialists, and three generalists of varied dietary breadth, were
recorded at each of the sites in 1994, 2004 and 2014. The populations of butterflyfishes
varied through time and space, and there were significant changes in foraging behaviors,
largely due to changes in the soft coral community. Moreover, our results indicate that
322

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

coincide with high incidence of the fibropapilloma disease. In sites with tainted SGD,
protected green turtleChelonia mydas graze on invasive weeds with substantial tissue N
stored as ARG and are subjected to as much as 14-fold increase, leading to a metabolic
promotion of the disease as ARG is a critical component in a Herpes lifecycle. However,
it is clear that plants draw down excess N and mobilized it for metabolic needs when
subjected to environmental N- limitations. To determine if bloom species can draw on
stored tissue N and a possible time-course for that drawdown, we collected invasives
from high nutrient sites and transferred them to oligotrophic reefs on Maui or held them
in laboratory settings with typical low nutrient waters. Tissues were sampled periodically
over two weeks. Plants grown in situ or in laboratory, with little known pollution, had
substantial declines in levels of ARG in tissues in relatively short periods; tissue ARG
often approached background levels. Thus, reduction in nutrient contamination of SGD
to coastal waters can have substantial and rapid impacts on biological systems, even in
the short term. These factors are important considerations for management of coastal
resources.

the soft coral specialists exhibited differential prey preferences that were directly attributable to their ability to handle soft coral chemical defenses.

“SUPER-QUENCHING” STATE PROTECTS SYMBIODINIUM FROM THERMAL


The global rise in sea surface temperatures causes regular exposure of corals to high
temperature and high light stress, leading to worldwide disastrous coral bleaching
events (loss of symbiotic dinoﬂagellates (Symbiodinium) from reef-building corals). Our
picosecond chlorophyll fluorescence experiments on cultured Symbiodinium Clade C
cells, exposed to coral bleaching conditions, uncovered the transformations of the alga’s
photosynthetic apparatus (PSA) that activate an extremely efficient non-photochemical
“super-quenching” mechanism. Ultrastructural investigation of the thylakoid membranes
under these elevated temperature conditions support a disaggregation of the formerly
structured arrangement as has been found in other investigations. Thus the mechanism
is associated with a transition from an initially heterogeneous photosystem II (PSII) pool
to a homogeneous “spillover” pool, where nearly all excitation energy is transferred to
photosystem I (PSI). There, the inherently higher stability of PSI and high quenching
efficiency of P700+ allow dumping of PSII excess excitation energy into heat, which
can result in almost complete cessation of photosynthetic electron transport (PET). This
potentially reversible “super-quenching” mechanism protects the PSA against destruction at the cost of a loss of photosynthetic activity. We suggest that the inhibition of PET
other processes, such as ROS production from the Mehler reaction may also occur and
cause irreversible damage to PSII

THE GENOMIC BASIS FOR ADAPTATION TO THERMALLY EXTREME REEFS
(Abstract ID: 28794)
Elevated sea temperatures have played a crucial role in the global decline of coral reefs
and are expected to lead to further declines in the near future. Despite the threat of
increased thermal stress due to climate change, corals’ capacity to adapt or acclimatise
to these conditions remains poorly understood. Corals in the thermally extreme Arabian
Gulf currently experience temperatures that exceed those expected on reefs in the tropics within the next century and therefore represent an excellent resource to study the genomic basis for adaptation to high thermal stress environments. In this study, population
genomics analyses were performed on Platygyra daedalea, using genome-wide SNPs
obtained through double digest restriction site associated DNA (ddRAD) sequencing of
corals from 12 reefs in the Arabian Gulf and the more benign Gulf of Oman. We use
genome-wide SNPs to describe reduced gene flow between reefs experiencing different
thermal regimes at both regional (Arabian Gulf and Gulf of Oman) and local scales
(inshore and offshore). The analysis of the genomic distribution of population genetic
in high temperature reefs, identifying genes and pathways responsible for Arabian Gulf
corals’ thermal tolerance. Furthermore, signatures of selection will be analysed to ascertain whether this thermal tolerance emerged from standing genetic variation or from
novel mutations within the Arabian Gulf, thereby providing vital insights into the capacity
for corals to respond to climate change.


UNITED STATES CORAL REEF TASK FORCE WATERSHED PARTNERSHIP INITIATIVE (Abstract ID: 29646)
The United States Coral Reef Task Force (USCRTF) created the Watershed Partnership
Initiative (Initiative) in 2009. The Initiative facilitates and enhances coordination, partnerships, and contributions of agency resources and expertise to implement geographically
specific and integrated activities to reduce pollutant loads to coral reef ecosystems. The
Initiative uses this approach in three selected priority watersheds (Guánica Bay/Rio
Loco in southwest Puerto Rico, West Maui, Hawaii, and Faga’alu in American Samoa)
with the intent for future application to other watersheds with likelihood for success.
Individual federal, state, territory, and commonwealth agencies contribute through direct
application of resources, authorities, technical assistance, and/or program expertise.
The National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF) also provides funding assistance
and coordination, develops relevant tools, and seeks to identify and fill gaps. The Initiative developed a series of goals, objectives, and actions which are implemented by the
USCRTF Watershed Working Group (Working Group). The Working Group consists
of staff from member agencies and jurisdictions, NFWF, and USCRTF priority and
jurisdictional watershed coordinators. They meet monthly to implement a USCRTF
resolution, and support watershed efforts and federal partnerships watersheds. A Metrics
Subcommittee was formed to develop an approach to evaluate efforts of the Initiative
and has been working collaboratively to develop tools and products to help document
success at the priority watersheds.


DEVELOPING A ZONING DESIGN FOR CONSERVATION, FISHERIES, AND BLUE
The Seychelles is a rich, tropical marine ecosystem situated in the Western Indian
Ocean. Encompassing 1.37 million square kilometres and 115 islands, Seychelles is a
recognised global biodiversity hotspot and contains two UNESCO sites. Biodiversity
is one of Seychelles’ most important assets and drives the country’s Blue Economy.
Seychelles has a goal of 30 percent of their Exclusive Economic Zone for conservation
and the Seychelles Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) Initiative is focused on developing a coarse-scale, multi-objective zoning design and management considerations for
conservation, fisheries, and other uses. The Initiative runs from 2014-2020 and has
significant input from stakeholders. To develop a draft zoning design we are using data
from multiple sources including academia, government, industry and participatory mapping. Commercial catch data were compiled from the industrial tuna fishery (2003-2012)
and semi-industrial and artisanal fisheries (2008-2013). We used Marxan to analyse
multi-year datasets from the Vessel Monitoring System, excluding high piracy years, and
spatially depict high-medium-low use areas for local fisheries. Using more than 100 conservation features, Marxan irreplaceability values developed by the UNDP-GEF-PCU
were used to propose biodiversity zones and check biodiversity representation targets.
The zoning design methodology considers ecological design principles for MPAs, coral
reef fisheries and designing marine managed areas, policy and management, and design
principles to maximise compliance, monitoring and enforcement.


IMPAIRED ALGAL TISSUES REGAIN LOW ARGININE LEVELS AFTER SHORT
Tainted submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) has lead to substantial nutrient loading
of polluted waters into coastal regions and sustains blooms of invasive algae in urban
Maui, Hawaii. Bloom algae sequester excess nitrogen (N) with high levels of tissue
N stored as amino acid arginine (ARG). Diets high in algal tissues with elevated ARG

323

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM



TO CULL OR NOT TO CULL AN INVASIVE PREDATOR? IT DEPENDS . . . (Abstract
ID: 29783)

OCEAN ACIDIFICATION CAUSES ABUNDANCE LOSS OF ZOOPLANKTON LIVING RESIDENTIAL TO CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28486)

Culling is commonly used in conservation as a means to eradicate invasive species or
to reduce their populations to levels that minimize ecological impacts. Culling can be an
effective management tool but it is labor-intensive, costly and its effects are sometimes
unpredictable. In the Caribbean, culling is widely used to control invasive Pacific red
lionfish,Pterois volitans , predators that have substantially reduced native prey fish abundances on coral reefs. However, the effectiveness of these control efforts is unclear. We
assessed the effectiveness of lionfish culling at varying frequencies in a 21-month-long
field experiment on natural reefs in The Bahamas. Surprisingly, culling every 6 months
was more effective at reducing lionfish densities than culling every 3 months, resulting in
average declines in lionfish densities of 79% and 60%, respectively, relative to unculled
reefs. However, these reductions in lionfish densities did not result in gains in native
prey fish biomass or species richness, which remained indistinguishable from unculled
reefs. Furthermore, lionfish densities were greater on culled than on unculled reefs while
native prey fish biomass and species richess were lower on culled than on unculled reefs
following Hurricane Irene, and these results persisted for several months following the
disturbance. Density-dependent lionfish movement and natural disturbances appear to
play a role in limiting the effectiveness of lionfish culling at local scales.

Several zooplankton species live completely residential to coral reefs by hiding within
the substratum during the day and migrating into the water column at night. Their role in
reef trophodynamics is rarely studied and yet they are critical to coral health, reef fisheries production, and nutrient cycling. Even less is known about how entire zooplankton
communities living within reefs are affected by the precipitous changes caused by
anthropogenic loading of carbon dioxide. Ocean acidification effects on zooplankton
have been studied for single-species, mostly calcium carbonate species or dominant copepod species, but community effects are scarcely understood. Here, we examined the
abundance and community composition of zooplankton living residential to coral reefs
at two reefs in Papua New Guinea where underwater seeps create a natural gradient in
using a variety of methods, including traditional net tows, emergence traps, and acoustical instruments. There was less zooplankton present in the reef affected by ocean acidification (pH 7.8) compared to the healthy reef (pH 8.1), and differences were consistent
across reefs and expeditions. Sensitivities varied considerably across taxa, with species
like the calanoid copepod Labidocera bataviae being more sensitive to ocean acidification
than other zooplankton. Zooplankton abundance loss will likely have cascading impacts
on entire reef ecosystems.

gov


TOP-DOWN VERSUS BOTTOM-UP REGULATION OF CORALS IN THE FLORIDA
KEYS (Abstract ID: 28057)
Caribbean coral reefs have drastically changed over the past 30 years with declines in
coral cover and herbivore abundance. In order to regulate increasing competitive macroalgae, protecting the remaining reef herbivores has become a primary conservation
goal throughout the Caribbean. However, this assumes that corals are limited primarily
by the top-down indirect effect of herbivores on macroalgae. To test the predictions
of this herbivore cascade hypothesis along with alterative bottom-up hypotheses, we
surveyed the reef community structure (parrotfish abundance and substrate cover) of 34
reefs in the middle region of the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary. Reef physical
structure was estimated by the first principle component composite variable (distance
from shore, depth, visibility, substrate complexity). We estimated the major influences
on percent coral cover using both multiple regression analysis and structural equation
modelling. Both methods suggest that there are positive top-down (parrotfish), negative
bottom-up (reef structure) and negative competitive (fleshy algae) influences on coral.
However, the structural equation models suggest that these are not driven by strong
negative interactions of parrotfish on turf or fleshy algae. Analysis of parrotfish foraging
behavior suggests that diet composition is highly variable and preferences for algae
change with relative abundance. These results suggest that hard corals of the middle
Florida Keys may be regulated by a complex interaction of top-down and bottom-up
influences independent of parrotfish herbivory.

BLEACHING AND DEPTH REFUGES IN THE EASTERN PACIFIC DURING THE
STRONG 2015-2016 EL NIÑO (Abstract ID: 29959)
The ongoing 2015-16 El Niño is third severe El Niño to impact reefs of the eastern tropical Pacific in the last 35 years. In the two previous events communities of the hydrocoral
Millepora intricata were extirpated from shallow water but survived in deeper water (> 12
m depth), facilitating shallow water recovery between disturbances. This supported the
deep reef refugia hypothesis, which posits that cooler temperatures and other physical
characteristics buffer corals in deep environments. However, this evidence lacked supporting oceanographic observations, and recent evidence from Caribbean mesophotic
reefs suggests that thermal tolerance is set by the mean warmest conditions, allowing
bleaching even when conditions are cool relative to shallow reefs. To understand the
oceanographic and biological processes that might support or inhibit a depth refuge, we
are studying the response of six species of stony coral at depths of 5 – 30 m in Panama
from shallow water study sites in Panama and other species showed paling, bleaching
or early stages of mortality. Below 15 m depth temperatures were cooler and corals
were unaffected. From the ultimate response of corals and the physical environment
to be sampled during the predicted spring 2016 thermal maximum, we will be able to
determine what physical factors support a bleaching refuge. These studies are critical to
assessing the importance of refugia in preventing regional and global coral extinction in
a warmer future.


ESA-LISTED INDO-PACIFIC CORALS: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
(Abstract ID: 29718)
Many reef-building coral species are in decline in both the Caribbean and Indo-Pacific
basins from a complex combination of global and local threats. Reef-building corals were
Indo-Pacific in 2014. ESA-listed Caribbean corals make up a substantial proportion of
the basin’s coral biodiversity, and include the primary reef-building species. They are also
Indo-Pacific corals make up a tiny fraction of the basin’s coral biodiversity, and do not
include any primary reef-building species. They are poorly studied, hard to identify, and
to be an impediment to conservation. However, the Indo-Pacific listings can provide numerous conservation opportunities, if implementation is adapted to meet the challenges.
Opportunities exist both via the formal protections applied to all listed species, as well as
via the informal support of ongoing and proposed conservation programs and projects.


MACROALGAE AND OCEAN ACIDIFICATION CAUSE SHIFTS IN BACTERIAL
COMMUNITIES ON CCA WITH IMPLICATIONS FOR CORAL LARVAL SETTLEMENT (Abstract ID: 29547)
Coral recruitment is critical to the maintenance of healthy reefs and the natural recovery
of degraded reefs. For some corals, settlement, which is an integral part of the recruitment process, appears to be dependent on the presence of chemical cues produced
by biofilm bacteria. Both macroalgal presence and ocean acidification (OA) have
detrimental impacts on coral settlement, but the extent to which these stressors impact
bacterial communities associated with settlement substrata has been underexplored.
Further, these stressors will not occur in isolation, and understanding the implications
of these factors in combination is critical. We exposed the crustose coralline alga
324

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

top of a tropical, submarine volcanic edifice. Coral-sponge reefs grew at the edge of an
expanding carbonate platform before they were decimated during mid-Silurian orogenic
pulses. As carbonate sedimentation resumed, megalodont bivalves formed dense concentrates associated with peri-tidal microbial communities. At the platform margin, coral
reefs were replaced by a distinctive microbial-sponge community, which built extensive
stromatolite reefs in the absence of diverse metazoans. After experiencing regional extinction, AT reef biotas did not recover for several million years. The microbe-dominated
reefs and nearshore stromatolites record widespread cyanobacterial “blooms” fueled
by orogenic activity, which generated significant terrestrial influx, reduced habitats for
normal-marine metazoans, and elevated nutrient loads. These ancient reefs indicate how
the rise of microbial slime was related to a sediment glut, yielding insights into the devastation that modern coral reefs are likely to experience if human activities contribute
increasing amounts of nutrient-laden sediment to the marine environment.

(CCA) Hydrolithon beorgesenii to direct macroalgal contact and OA separately and in
combination. Coral larvae responded differently to CCA surfaces that had been exposed
to macroalgae and lowered pH, even when the larvae themselves were not directly
exposed to the algae indicating a change in surface properties of the CCA as a result of
these stressors. High-throughput sequencing of the CCA surfaces revealed significant
shifts in the bacterial communities of CCA exposed to macroalgae. Given the increasing
evidence that bacteria provide important settlement cues for some corals, it is likely that
shifts seen in response of corals to surfaces treated with macroalgae and OA may be
linked to changes in the bacterial communities on these surfaces.

ADVANCING ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING SOLUTIONS FOR OUR WORLD’S
OCEANS (Abstract ID: 29565 | Poster ID: 548)


The Earth’s changing climate provides many uncertainties. What we do know is the
effect it is having on the oceans. Higher acidity levels are known to slow the growth of
organisms forming calcareous skeletons or shells, including corals and shellfish. Ocean
acidification investigation is an application that benefits from multi-parameter measurements expressed by the necessity of measuring at least two of the four parameters of
the marine carbonate system. While analytical instruments are available for the four
recently launched HydroFIA® TA, which is being used by researchers for continuous
monitoring and the determination of the total alkalinity in seawater. In October 2015
a new project revolving around seawater alkalinity started: “Tracking Ocean Alkalinity
using New Carbon Measurement Technologies.” The project will use four different deployment platforms to enhance ocean acidification monitoring within the North western
Atlantic extending from coastal hatcheries to the Iceland, and at a reef system in La
regional observation network is expected to provide more accurate and reliable ocean
acidification monitoring. The outcome will provide much needed knowledge for ocean
acidification studies that are important for examining the growth of organisms forming
calcareous skeletons or shells, including corals.

FROM OTOLITH TO ORDINANCE: UTILIZING BIOLOGY AS BASIS FOR CLOSE
SEASON POLICY FOR SIGANIDS (Abstract ID: 27933)
Translating scientific findings into policy is integral to successful resource management.
Utilizing results of studies on the very small and unfamiliar part of fish known as otoliths
or earbones, local policy action through passage of a town ordinance to declare close
season for siganids has been achieved. The present study exemplifies a science-policy
continuum for an extremely important resource, culturally and economically, in Lagonoy
Gulf, northeast Philippines. Researches of Bicol University in the gulf revealed the ages
three weeks based from analysis of the microstructure of the fish’s otoliths. The highest
volume of juvenile settlement occurred on and near the new moon dates in March,
April and May. Adding few days for egg development of the fish, spawning has been
inferred by back-calculation to occur between the first quarter and new moon. From
these information, the researchers of the university sought audience and elucidated
these results before the Tabaco City law-making council. After series of discussions
with council executives and public hearing, the close season ordinance for siganids from
February to May has been approved by the council in 2010. Under the ordinance, it is
prohibited to catch juveniles, maturing and mature siganids during these months in the
municipal waters. There has been very slight increase in juvenile production since 2010
in the last 5 years. Continuing challenge is monitoring compliance to the ordinance and
its effectiveness.


CORAL ASSOCIATED MICROBIAL PARTNERS INFLUENCE HOLOBIONT METABOLITE PROFILES (Abstract ID: 28760)


Microbial symbiotic partners, such as those associated with reef building corals, mediate
biochemical transformations that influence host performance and alter the trajectory
of individual survival. While evidence suggests microbial community composition
partly accounts for differences in coral physiology, how these symbionts alter metabolic
pathways remains underexplored. We aimed to assess functional variation between coral
associated microbial partners in hospite. To this end, we collected fragments from 9 coral
species and characterized associated Symbiodinium and prokaryotic communities in
tandem with holobiont nuclear magnetic resonance based metabolomic profiling. Our
data demonstrate Symbiodinium composition, prokaryotic communities, and metabolite
profiles are species-specific. Taking this holistic approach in describing the relationships
between metabolite composition and symbiont assemblages, we also show that a coral’s
symbiont composition significantly influences the colony’s metabolite profile. Using
Porites spp. as a case study, we present evidence that different sub-clades of Symbiodinium and prokaryote phylotypes distinctly influence the abundance and composition
of functionally important metabolites. Our data suggests that while some microbial
partners benefit the union, others are more opportunistic and possibly parasitize the
host. Consequently, coral partner choice alters colony metabolite composition, likely
influencing cellular metabolic activities and, therefore, colony nutritional provisioning.

HIGH-LATITUDE REEFS AS NOVEL ECOSYSTEMS – MODELS FOR FUTURE
SPECIES CONFIGURATIONS, INTERACTIONS AND FUNCTIONS (Abstract ID:
29111)
Ecosystems are responding to global change with novel species configurations, interactions and functions. Biogeographic transition zones, where tropical, subtropical and
temperate species overlap, are ideal systems in which to study the links between novel
species compositions, environmental gradients and ecological processes. Here, we
examine these dynamics in the tropical-to-temperate transition zone in eastern Australia,
where corals occur at their range limits. Systematic variation in zoogeographic, functional
and phylogenetic patterns suggests that environmental filtering shapes coral biodiversity
patterns. Corals on high-latitude reefs are a non-random subset of the Great Barrier
Reef species pool, as only species that tolerate marginal conditions are able to persist.
While this supports the dominant role of abiotic filtering at regional scale, phylogenetic
diversity patterns reveal growing influence of competition at lower latitude. Range
limit determinants of corals vary among taxa, as patterns in species richness and the
abundance of tropical species respond to light availability, whereas cold stress and
temperature variability limit subtropical species and functional diversity. Moreover, high
abundance and gradients of macroalgae, echinoderms, other invertebrates and fishes
point to the important role of these taxa in shaping ecological dynamics on high-latitude
abiotic stress, herbivory) thus provide predictive models for potential novel reef configurations under climate change.


THE RISE OF SLIME IN SILURIAN CORAL-SPONGE-MICROBIAL REEFS IN
ALASKA’S ALEXANDER TERRANE: INSIGHTS FROM ECOLOGICAL TRANSITIONS AFFECTING MODERN CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28377 | Poster ID: 233)
The Alexander terrane (AT) is a Neoproterozoic island arc that accreted to North
America in the Mesozoic. Diagnostic biotas constrain the AT’s Silurian paleogeography
ecological changes in reefs that are analogous to those recorded at some modern reef
sites. During the Silurian, the 3000 m-thick Heceta Limestone accumulated in the AT on

325

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


70% EtOH, embedded in Paraplast, sectioned with a rotary microtome, and stained
utilizing a modified Heidenhain’s Azocarmine-Aniline blue method. Results indicate
that both species are simultaneous hermaphroditic brooders, with a single annual
gametogenetic cycle. Spermatocytes and oocytes of different stages were found within
the same mesentery indicating possible sequential maturation for extended planulation.
7 months prior to spermatocytes both sexes reaching maturity simultaneously over
higher polyp (IR=33.16±4.44, IS=3.78±6.42) (t-test, p<0.001) and mesenterial fecundity
and Mycetophyllia.

MULTI-SCALAR INTERACTIONS OF A LOCAL ISLAND FISHERIES: SPATIAL
MANAGEMENT AND GEOPOLITICAL CONSIDERATIONS (Abstract ID: 28453)
Fisheries and coral reef management is rarely contained in just one scale of governance.
Shifts in international market conditions or new global agreements may affect how smallscale fisheries are managed and utilized. Similarly, fishers’ strategies, through compliance
and self-initiatives, can be expected to influence the governability of fishing regulations.
While we know that management and conservation action is often connected to multiple
scales, much research has been preoccupied with the local level, giving inadequate attention to the interactions that occur beyond the local processes. This presentation illustrates the multi-scalar nature of fisheries spatial planning and management by drawing
on the Korean case of a Yeonpyeong Island fishery in the Yellow Sea. More specifically,
by applying the notion of governmentality, I show that a locally-operating fisheries can
be embroiled in domestic politics or international maritime boundary disputes, thereby
being influenced by (as well as extending its influence to) wider governance scales. At
the same time, this example highlights a case of fisheries embedded in extra-sectoral
conservation and management. I end the presentation by exploring what these insights
might mean for coral reef conservation, with special reference to the circumstances
unfolding in the South China Sea.


MESOPHOTIC MACROALGAE ACROSS THE HAWAIIAN ARCHIPELAGO: DECIPHERING THE DIVERSITY AND DISTRIBUTION OF DEEP LIMU (Abstract ID:
29933)


DONGSHA ATOLL IN SOUTH CHINA SEA, THE STATUS, THE RESEARCH, THE
STATION (Abstract ID: 28595 | Poster ID: 704)

Macroalgae are a conspicuous, yet poorly described, component of mesophotic ecosystems in Hawaii, forming habitat for coral reef fish in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
(NWHI) and vast meadows in the Main Hawaiian Islands (MHI). Over the past 10 years,
we have used submersibles, ROVs, and technical diving to survey the distribution and
diversity of mesophotic algae at 76 sites across the Hawaiian Archipelago. Expansive
macroalgal meadows of native or invasive green algae were found around Oahu
(Avrainvillea sp., Udotea sp.) and the Maui Nui Island complex (Halimeda kanaloana) to
90 m, with distinct distribution patterns among specific islands. In contrast, macroalgal
records and new species of macroalgae were discovered, suggesting the mesophotic
flora is distinct from shallow water. Molecular analyses revealed that mesophotic sea
lettuces in Hawaiian waters form unique communities composed of four new species
within the genera Ulva and Umbraulva. Similar patterns of cryptic diversity are emerging
for other dominant algae, such as the brown alga Distromium. Overall, the mesophotic
flora appears to be abundant and biogeographically diverse with a combination of
temperate, subtropical, and tropical affinities. The current study contributes greatly to our
understanding of marine biodiversity and biogeography in the Pacific, and has significant
implications regarding the unique nature of mesophotic coral ecosystems in Hawaii.

Dongsha Atoll, situated in north South China Sea, is comprised of several major habitats.
The 16 km-diameter lagoon and hundreds of patch reefs therein are mostly covered
by hard corals. Extensive bleaching of stony corals occurred in summer of 2015. Most
seemed to survive in according to a spotted survey in January 2016. The 80 km2 seagrass beds circles the lagoon and Dongsha Island;to large patches in north and northeast
part of the atoll, totaling 25 km2, died off in summer of 2014 as recorded by satellite pictures and confirmed by ground truthing by divers. They have yet to recover and added
another bleached patch in summer of 2015. The reef crest is covered by hard corals and
debris. The reef slope extending down to 35 m deep and more is dominated by soft corals with hard corals playing a minor role; they remain unharmed in the 2014-present period. Since 2013, ~150 researcher-visits and ~1000 on-island-days exploited the facilities
of Dongsha Atoll Research Station, per year. Accommodation, bench space, boats, as
well as logistic support, etc were provided to both domestic and international researchers. The researches encompass issues related to global warming, ocean acidification,
internal waves, reef geology, atmosphere, biology and biodiversity of tropical seas.

CROWD-SOURCING CORAL REEF VISUALIZATION- THE ARRAS EXPERIENCE
(Abstract ID: 30113 | Poster ID: 561)

gov

The Automated Rapid Reef Assessment System (ARRAS) was a Philippine Governmentfunded research project which began in 2010 to develop low-cost tools and software to
create permanent visual records of the sea floor at a fast rate. Four years on since we
introduced an ARRAS platform so that coral reef visualization can be crowd-sourced
(Teardrop ICRS 2012) we report our experience in deploying the tools as well as the
feedback from local governments, schools, and regional environment and natural
resources offices to whom the system was donated to. Their feedback led us to develop
newer technologies such as towed platforms that can image shallow, wide or deep corals, software that can stitch high definition videos from multiple cameras, and calibration
techniques to estimate coral sizes from video mosaics. Together with local partners
all around the Philippines we have captured nearly 1000km of coastline around the
archipelago, 1/10th of the estimated 10000km of coastline with reefs. The collected and
processed data has been used for coral cover assessment, change detection, automatic
classification studies and site selection.

MAUI’S CORAL REEFS; MANAGEMENT SUCCESSES AND FUTURE CHALLENGES (Abstract ID: 28469)
Maui’s coral reefs are experiencing numerous anthropogenic stressors ranging from
land-based sources of pollution to overfishing. Fifteen years of marine monitoring by the
State of Hawaii, Division of Aquatic Resources, has highlighted examples where coral
reefs appear to be degrading, as well as some instances of recovery. This information has been instrumental in guiding recent resource management efforts including
changes to parrotfish and goatfish bag and size limits in 2014, and has helped evaluate
past management actions including a ban on the use of lay-gillnets in 2007, and the
establishment of the Kahekili Herbivore Fisheries Management Area in 2009. Here we
review trends in both benthic cover and fish biomass to identify examples of resiliency
in reef ecosystems, and to highlight management efforts that appear to have helped reefs
recover from disturbances. Five years of herbivore management at Kahekili has resulted
in biomass increases of 30% in surgeonfishes and 135% in parrotfishes, while the benthic
cover of crustose coralline algae has increased from 2% to 14%. A crown of thorns outbreak in the Ahihi Kinau Natural Area Reserve resulted in a 78% reduction in coral cover,
however ten years later, this reef has fully recovered. A careful evaluation of these types
of reef recovery events will help managers prepare for and deal with newly emerging
threats from global climate change and should help Hawaii’s reefs survive into the future.

com

SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN THE CARIBBEAN CORAL GENUS ISOPHYLLIA
(SCLERACTINIA: MUSSIDAE) IN PUERTO RICO (Abstract ID: 28476 | Poster ID:
178)
The sexual pattern, reproductive mode, and timing of reproduction of Isophyllia sinuosa and Isophyllia rigida, two small Caribbean Mussids, were assessed by histological
analysis of specimens collected monthly during 2000-2001 and 2012. Tissue cores
were fixed in Helly’s Zenker formalin solution, decalcified in 10% HCl, dehydrated in

326

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


Marine ecosystems in the Maldives are richly diverse, but are experiencing growing
pressure from coastal development and tourism. Assessing the status of coral-reef
communities along gradients of human pressure is necessary to evaluate recovery
capacity of reefs in the face of anthropogenic threats. Islands in the North Ari Atoll,
which are exposed to different human impact and management regimes (4 each community, uninhabited, and resort islands), were sampled during the International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN)-REGERATE Cruise in 2015. Assessments were carried
out using the FORAM Index (FI), based on relative abundances of larger foraminiferal
shells in reef sediments. Lower FI values in the vicinity of the community island of
Rashdoo indicate likely nutrification of waters associated with disposal of domestic
wastes. Somewhat higher FI values were recorded around the resort island of Velidhoo.
The highest values were recorded near an unihabited island, Gaattafushi. Overall, FI
values determined for the reefs in North Ari indicate that water quality should support
active reef accretion by reef-building corals and larger benthic foraminifers. Note that
the FI was designed to account for local changes in water-quality, and not for regional
to global changes associated with temperature stress or ocean acidification. This study
stems from a joint scientific expedition by IUCN-Marine Research Centre and University
of Queensland to study coral reefs in North Ari. We warmly thank the Swiss National
Science Foundation Projects 200021_149589 and IZK0Z2_165131.

SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN THE CARIBBEAN CORAL GENUSCOLPOPHYLLIA
IN PUERTO RICO (Abstract ID: 29692 | Poster ID: 168)
Colpophyllia natans spawns during summer months throughout the Gulf of Mexico
and Caribbean. Its reproductive cycle has never been characterized until a preliminary
histological study in La Parguera, Puerto Rico in 1999, which revealed most gametes
to be mature in spring, with few in summer. Therefore, indicating the presence of two
Colpophyllia species in La Parguera. After a morphological assessment in the field, two
distinct morphologies were identified. Preliminary tissue samples were collected before
summer spawning to confirm species identification by presence absence of mature
oocytes. Then, tissue samples from five to ten colonies were collected monthly between
July 2014 and June 2015. Samples were processed and examined following common
are hermaphroditic broadcasters with one annual gametogenetic cycle. Oogenesis
lasted ten to eleven months and began earlier than spermatogenesis in both species.
respectively. These results are similar to other Caribbean Faviinae species. A taxonomic
revision of the genus will be done in the near future with these data.

edu


REEF SCENT: HOW BROODED CORAL LARVAE FROM A TOUGH CORAL SMELL
THEIR WAY TO A NEW HOME (Abstract ID: 28255)

INTERACTIONS OF CORAL RECRUITS AND JUVENILE CORALS WITH SEDIMENT AND ALGAE ON REEFS IN THE FLORIDA KEYS (Abstract ID: 30110 | Poster
ID: 199)

Coral reefs are highly diverse marine ecosystems of ecological, economic, and cultural
value. With the expected negative effects on reefs from global climate change including
rising sea temperatures and ocean acidification, the identification of resilient coral
species has become increasingly important. Leptastrea purpurea is an encrusting coral
that is found throughout the Indo-Pacific and Red Sea. While most corals are broadcast
spawners, releasing sperm and eggs to be fertilized in the water column, some corals
release planula larvae on a continuous basis from the parent colony as observed during
