expression analyses are under way to enable a deeper understanding of the molecular
bases of this competitive interaction.



SYNERGISTIC EFFECTS OF OCEAN WARMING AND ACIDIFICATION ON
GROWTH AND SURVIVORSHIP OF COMMON REEF-BUILDING CORALS (Abstract ID: 28537)
Ongoing climate change is considered to be one of the greatest threats to the persistence
of reef building corals. More specifically, increasing temperatures are expected to be
compounded by ocean acidification, leading to declines in abundance and survivorship

USE OF MESOPHOTIC CORAL ECOSYSTEMS BY INVASIVE WESTERN ATLANTIC LIONFISH (Abstract ID: 28308)
10

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

vices in the Pacific Proving Grounds at Eniwetok and Bikini Atoll of the Marshall Islands.
The measurable lag in reaching Guam can be tied to ocean surface currents and can
be traced to other regional ∆14C records from corals, providing a transport timeline to
places as distant as the Indonesian throughflow, Okinawa and Palmyra. These observations were validated with surface current modeling.

The severe negative effects of invasive lionfish (Pterois volitans and Pterios miles) on western Atlantic shallow reefs are well documented, yet despite lionfish recorded on deeper
reefs, the use of mesophotic coral ecosystems (MCEs) in invasive lionfish ecology and
life history remains a significant gap in our knowledge. We combine studies of lionfish
abundance and body length on shallow (0-30m) and mesophotic (30-150m) reefs from
63 sites in seven western Atlantic countries. Lionfish were found at similar abundances
on adjacent shallow and mesophotic invaded reefs and in some locations MCE lionfish
were larger than shallow individuals. This suggests MCEs may form part of a natural
ontogenetic migration, with older lionfish found at greater depths. To further understand
these patterns we conducted detailed lionfish surveys around Utila, Hondruas from
5-85m depth during June-September 2015. Our results indicate a depth refuge around
Utila, with greater densities of larger lionfish recorded on MCEs than shallow reefs.
We took detailed measurements and dissection data of circa. 500 lionfish across this
depth range. Male lionfish were found to be more reproductively mature on MCEs than
shallow reefs, though interestingly reproductive maturity and mean gonad weight was
not found to be different with depth for female lionfish. This study highlights the need for
lionfish adaptive management to consider lionfish populations below the depth limit of
recreational SCUBA diving, as the focus of most previous control (culling) measures has
been shallow water.


NEW CHALLENGES FACED BY DOMINANT CORALS IN HONG KONG MARGINAL CORAL COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 29360)
The marginal coral communities in Hong Kong are dominated by a few species. Notable
of these is Platygyra acuta which dominates many of the communities in NE Hong
Kong. Studies conducted over the years have focused on the question “what makes it
dominant”. Experimental results have shown it to possess some dominant characteristics, including competitive aggressiveness and high tolerance to several environmental
stresses, like elevated sea water temperature, lowered salinity ad high nutrients. On
the other hand, it being very slow growing with very low recruitment rate appears to
compromise these advantages. Recently, it is also shown to be very prone to sea urchin
attack and sensitive to diseases, with the latter being associated with eutrophication
and harmful algal bloom. Environmental changes brought about either by global climate
acuta. With dominant species becoming less dominant, there could be significant implications on structural changes in Hong Kong coral communities. This project is supported
by RGC GRF 14122215.


QUANTITY, NOT QUALITY – FIRST LARGE-SCALE CENSUS OF INDO-PACIFIC
SCLERACTINIAN CORALS (Abstract ID: 30102 | Poster ID: 702)
Over the past centuries, the global abundances of humans and most wild species have
followed markedly opposite trajectories. While the human population has grown exponentially, an increasing number of species is considered threatened by extinction, including one-third of scleractinian corals. In contrast to human population size estimates, our
quantitative understanding of status and trends in abundance is highly limited for most
taxa. This is particularly true for corals. Their vast geographic range and population
sizes entail inevitable trade-offs between taxonomic and spatial resolution. Data on
species-level abundances is therefore scarce, geographically biased towards well-studied
reefs and species and not readily collatable for meta-analyses due to inconsistencies in
sampling design. This study provides for the first time, census population size estimates
for more than 300 scleractinian corals at a longitudinal scale of 10,000km (Indonesia to
French Polynesia). Estimates are calculated using species-level abundance data from a
single, hierarchically structured (fringing reefs in 5 regions, 3 islands, 4 sites, 3 habitats:
reef flat, slope and crest) and methodologically consistent dataset and corresponding
regional estimates of reef area. This first large-scale quantitative account of scleractinian
abundances will significantly advance our understanding of their conservation status and
coral population biology in general. Recent estimates of global tree density illustrate the
informative value of providing quantitative reference frames for global biodiversity.


IS THE STATUS OF CURRENT BENTHIC CORAL REEF COMMUNITIES OF
SAUDI ARABIA LINKED TO ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS? (Abstract ID:
30128 | Poster ID: 56)
Chemical and physical characteristics of marine environments are important factors
shaping coral reef communities. The Red Sea, which extends from around 27° N to
13° N, shows significant gradients in the chemical and physical conditions, establishing
boundaries for species populations and transitions in benthic communities. Accordingly, early surveys of the 1990s found differences in Scleractinia-dominated benthic
communities along a north-south gradient, separating three faunistic zones. However, the
latitudinal transitions of benthic coral reef communities have recently been questioned
for Saudi Arabian Red Sea Coral reefs as temporal shifts and geographic homogenization of the benthic communities were observed. Benthic ecosystem alteration over
time caused by environmental change and ongoing regional degradation by coastal
development were suggested. Here, we present results of coral reef assemblages from
the northern (Duba), central (Thuwal, Jeddah) and southern (Al Lith, Farasan Islands)
Saudi Arabian Red Sea. Coral reef surveys were conducted between 2014 and 2016
using photo quadrate-transects at 2-5m and 10m depths. We investigate whether a
homogenization of Scleractinia communities prevails over the apparent gradients of salinity, temperature, nutrients and primary production. The status and differences in coral
reef communities were assessed and compared with local water parameters (phosphate,
nitrate, chlorophyll a, and temperature). The results are being discussed in the context of
potential factors driving the spatial coral reef community patterns.


NUCLEAR BOMBS AND CORAL: GUAM CORAL CORE REVEALS OPERATIONSPECIFIC RADIOCARBON SIGNALS FROM THE PACIFIC PROVING GROUNDS
(Abstract ID: 27966 | Poster ID: 9)
Radiocarbon (14C) analyses on a coral core extracted from the western Central Pacific
(Guam) has revealed a series of early peaks in the marine bomb 14C record. The typical
marine bomb 14C signal, one that is phase lagged and attenuated relative to atmospheric
bomb 14C, is present in the coral core and is consistent with other North Pacific records.
However, 14C levels that are well above what can be explained by air-sea diffusion alone
punctuate this pattern. This anomaly has been demonstrated to a limited extent in other
coral cores of the Indo-Pacific region, but is unmatched relative to the magnitude and
temporal resolution recorded in the Guam coral core. Other records have shown an early
∆14C rise on the order of 40-50‰ above pre-bomb levels, with a subsequent decline
before continuing the gradual ∆14C rise that is indicative of air-sea diffusion of 14CO2.
The Guam coral ∆14C record provided three strong pulses in 1954-55, 1956-57, and
1958-59 that are superimposed on the pre-bomb to initial ∆14C rise from atmospheric


ABUNDANCE PATTERNS OF CORAL-DEPENDENT REEF FISHES IN SELECT
SITES IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29099)
Abundance and species diversity of coral-dependent fishes are affected by coral cover
and so are often used as indicators of coral reef health. The community structure of
coral-dependent reef fishes in relation to the benthic composition was analyzed for
11

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

at least 17 municipalities in the Philippines. Fish abundances were obtained through
underwater fish visual census (n≥6 50-meter transects per municipality). Benthic
cover was obtained using photo transect method along the same transects. At least 80
species from seven families (Chaeototidae, Pomacanthidae, Pomacentridae, Labridae,
Apogonidae, Zanclidae, Serranidae subfamily Anthiinae) were observed in the sites.
Abundances of coral-dependent fish were generally low, except for small pomacentrids
Chromis ternatensis and Dascyllus reticulatus that shelter in branching Acropora and
Pocillopora. Some sites had very similar benthic cover but had the most dissimilar adult
for the aquarium trade. Most aquarium fishes are coral-dependent and there are 10-15
reported aquarium fishers in Lian. Juvenile recruitment appeared to be similar across the
municipalities. This study shows that other factors, such as threats from fishing, should be
used in combination with the abundance and species diversity of coral-dependent fish in
assessing coral reef health, and that the aquarium fish trade may have a large impact on
fish community structure.

MCEs are buffered by depth or distance from shore from surface-based disturbances.
We investigated changes in percent benthic cover at quarterly intervals over one year
at two mesophotic sites along the insular slope: El Hoyo (low rugosity, low slope) and
Hole-in-the-Wall (high rugosity, high slope). Data were obtained from two replicate
high-resolution phototransects conducted at each of two depths (50, 70 m) at each site.
Nonmetric multidimensional scaling showed that site and depth combinations tended to
cluster separately, with individual transects within site/depth typically having less than
80% but greater than 60% similarity over space and time. Temporal trends were similar
across sites and depths. Dominant changes occurred among the algae, particularly Dictyota and Schizothrix, with the former oscillating from near 0 to over 30% cover, peaking
in March and September. The latter species showed a general increase over time. The
magnitude of change was higher at 50 m. The degree and magnitude of variability at
mesophotic depths was less than previously documented at 30m depth. While temporal
variability declines with depth, relative impacts must account for potential reductions in
productivity as well.



SUPPORTING SMART CHOICES FOR CORAL REEF MANAGEMENT AND
POLICY IN A CHANGING WORLD (Abstract ID: 28870)
Climate change, global and regional economic flux, human populations, and coastal and
urban developments are among the many forces influencing the status and trend of coral
reefs. Decision problems on coral reefs are multi-faceted issues influenced by local and
global cumulative impacts within linked social-ecological systems. For coral reef managers and policy makers to make informed decisions in this complex setting, tools are required that improve clarity of issues, options, risks and the consequences of actions. The
purpose of this talk is to paint a picture of how decision science, specifically a structured
decision-making approach, can provide such clarity. We use (1) coastal development projects, (2) land-use management, and (3) control of Crown of Thorns Starfish (COTS) as
examples to illustrate the key elements of a structured decision process. We demonstrate
the role of models in informing and predicting consequences and their uncertainty. We
and scales (local, regional, global) can be broken down into clear and tangible decision
problems. Although global drivers are not under the direct control of reef managers,
understanding their influence on the system can guide efforts to alleviate interacting localscale effects and in setting realistic goals for regional-scale management strategies.

UNRAVELING THE COMPLEXITY OF THE CORAL MICROBIOME: DESCRIPTIONS OF PUTATIVE AND CONFIRMED ENDOSYMBIONTS (Abstract ID: 28195)
Corals engage in relationships with prokaryotic microorganisms which are thought to
play important roles in coral health. However, the significance or role of most prokaryotic endosymbionts in corals has remained elusive, and this is partially attributed to the
complexity of the prokaryotic communities within the biogeochemically diverse mucus,
tissue and skeletal microenvironments of corals. Here we present small subunit ribosomal DNA gene-based sequencing data of bacteria and archaea from decalcified coral
tissues of common Caribbean and Pacific corals which demonstrates that corals do
harbor specific tissue-associated, putative endosymbiotic bacteria and archaea. In some
cases, we utilized specific probes with fluorescent in situ hybridization and microscopy to
visualize and localize these cells within the tissues of the coral, thereby confirming their
endosymbiotic nature. We will describe the location of these endosymbionts in corals,
the potential significance of these relationships, and our ongoing efforts to elucidate the
functional interactions between prokaryotic cells and the coral holobiont.



CARBON ABSORPTION AT TRANSPLATATION OF CORAL REEFS IN NIRWANA
BEACH, PADANG, WEST SUMATRA, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 28814)
ABSTRACT Coral reefs is one of the most important ecosystems in the sea. Coral reefs
not only provide place for feeding but also capable of carbon absorption in skeleton.
This research was conducted on June 2014 in the area of transplantation of coral reefs
in coastal waters, Nirwana Beach Padang, West Sumatra, Indonesia. This study aimed
to see the amount of carbon stored in three species of coral reefs. The Three species
of coral are Acropora formosa, Acropora millepora, Acropora humilis that transplanted
during the six months sampled and measured the amount of carbon stored in coral skeletons using techniques Spectrofotometry. The results from this study show the carbon
sequestered in the coral skeleton Each of these coral species in this study have different
absorption, the absorption of the highest in this study is Acropora humilis. Keyword:
Coral Reefs, Carbon, Coral Transplantation

SEASONAL VARIABILITY OF MESOPHOTIC BENTHIC COMMUNITIES AT TWO
SITES AND DEPTHS OFF LA PARGUERA, PUERTO RICO (Abstract ID: 29778)

GENOME ANALYSIS OF CORAL DINOFLAGELLATE SYMBIONTS HIGHLIGHTS
EVOLUTIONARY ADAPTATIONS TO A SYMBIOTIC LIFESTYLE (Abstract ID:
28676)

Coral reefs are dynamic environments, and rapid changes in benthic cover can occur
in response to environmental conditions or biological interactions. Mesophotic coral
ecosystems are thought to be more stable than shallow coral reefs because it is assumed

Members of the genus Symbiodinium, best known for their ability to form symbiotic

12

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

relationships with scleractinian corals, harbor among the smallest dinoflagellate genomes
providing an opportunity to interrogate genomic evolution and endosymbiosis in this
enigmatic group of protists. We sequenced the genome of Symbiodinium microadriaticum (clade A1) and compared it to the available genome of Symbiodinium minutum
(clade B1) and transcriptomes from other dinoflagellates. Despite a conserved preference for non-canonical splice-sites, unidirectional gene arrangement, and a paucity of
regulatory upstream motifs, both genomes showed an unexpected degree of genomic
divergence. Comparative analyses of the encoded protein sets revealed a strong enrichment of transmembrane transporters involved in the exchange of nutrients in dinoflagellates. Importantly, we find that Symbiodinium, in contrast to other dinoflagellates, have
evolved an extensive repertoire of bicarbonate transporters and carbonic anhydrases
to ensure provision of CO2 for photosynthesis, as well as ammonium transporters to
counter nitrogen limitation, possibly to evade growth control by the host. Phylogenetic
analyses of these transporters suggest lineage-specific expansions that imply stark
physiological differences between species that may define differences in host compatibility. Our results unravel several genomic aspects underlying the ecological success of
dinoflagellates, and highlight the importance of gene duplications as an evolutionary
mechanism for adaptation in dinoflagellates and Symbiodinium.


CONTROLS ON REEF DEGRADATION AND RECOVERY (Abstract ID: 28058)
Reef frameworks in the western Atlantic and eastern Pacific record the millennial-scale
persistence of dominant coral species. These coral populations were at times disrupted
by the direct and indirect impacts of climate change, and by other large-scale perturbations. If macroalgae dominated these reefs in the past, that dominance would have
been a consequence rather than a cause of coral mortality. At annual to decadal scales,
contemporary coral and macroalgal dynamics appear to be decoupled in the absence
of external drivers, whether the cover of living coral is low or high. Macroalgal cover
tends to fluctuate in a complementary fashion with CTB (crustose coralline algae, fine
algal turfs, and bare space), independent of coral cover. When modern coral populations
are killed, the space opened may or may not be colonized by macroalgae; macroalgal
dominance, when it occurs, is again a consequence rather than a cause of coral mortality. Macroalgal cover may be either dependent on or independent of levels of herbivory
by sea urchins and, in some cases, herbivorous fish. The future trajectories of many coral
populations will likely be driven primarily by climate change, in which case enhancing
herbivory might provide partial help as a management strategy. However, overemphasizing local issues such as the abundance of parrotfish will not save coral reefs.


Mexico

UNDERSTANDING PHILIPPINE REEF FISH DIVERSITY AMIDST RISING
THREATS AND MANAGEMENT EFFORTS (Abstract ID: 29458)
The Philippines is part of the global epicenter of marine biodiversity but our knowledge
on the state of its own marine biodiversity remains incomplete. Biodiversity assessments
have been few, especially since they require large resources for sample collections. This
gap is critical because of the urgency to improve conservation amidst rising threats.
Here, we used information from underwater visual census to study reef fish diversity
over 2,200 transects and 167 cities/municipalities were used to assess spatio-temporal
trends in diversity and to identify potential hotspots for reef fishes in the country. Information on the current protection status of the different sites was also used to determine
priority conservation areas. Initial analyses show that most sites have low to moderate
levels of species richness and diversity despite the presence of marine protected areas
(MPAs) although species richness has remained high in other areas even without clear
management initiatives. The study explores the role of both natural ecological processes
and exposure to threats on the observed patterns of diversity in Philippine reef fishes.
The need to complement protection efforts with other fisheries management strategies to address overexploitation and destructive fishing practices is also highlighted.
Facilitating conservation issues are put into context with their strategic relevance and
implementation.

GENETIC STRUCTURE OF BICOLOR DAMSELFISH IN CAMPECHE BANK
CORAL REEFS (MEXICO) (Abstract ID: 29863 | Poster ID: 193)
Long term ecosystem resilience is related to the degree of connectivity present within
and between populations. We studied genetic connectivity (gene flow) indirectly through
allele frequency analysis. We sampled bicolor damselfish (Stegastes partitus)-a small territorial demersal fish- to study dispersal. Dispersal occurs exclusively during the pelagic
larval phase (PLD = 28 days). In order to study genetic connectivity in ecological time
scales, we sampled recruits and used microsatellites as molecular markers. Three reefs
were sampled: Cay Arenas, Cay Arcas, and the Alacranes atoll, wich are separated by
200 - 350 kilometers. The project consisted of PCR, genotyping in an automated sequencer, and computer analysis of the allele frequencies observed. Several methodologies were used to analyze the data. We quantified genetic diversity, and evaluated genetic
structure using: private alleles, traditional hierarchical coefficients (Gst, Rst, global and
pairwise), AMOVA, genetic distance measures, J’ost D, PCoa, cluster assignment tests,
and network analysis. Results showed weak genetic structure thereby low levels of
gene flow between sites. The genetic composition of recruits showed some similarities between sampling sites, suggesting that even though there’s genetic heterogeneity
in the system, recruits have the capacity to disperse between the three reefs sampled.
The degree and manner in wich the genetic diversity is distributed among coral reefs is
important in the elucidation of the scale of connectivity in reefs, both for basic science
and conservation planning.


LEVELS AND DRIVERS OF COMPLIANCE WITH MARINE PROTECTED AREAS
(Abstract ID: 29921)
Marine protected areas (MPAs) are widely used tools for marine conservation and fisheries management. Compliance alone is a strong predictor of fish biomass within MPAs.
Hence, fishers’ compliance is critical for MPA effectiveness. However, there are few
studies looking into compliance with MPAs. Without such information, practitioners have
limited opportunities to provide effective interventions. The effectiveness of MPAs relies
largely on users’ compliance, particularly from fishers, because fishing can profoundly
degrade global marine biodiversity and ecosystems. The mere presence of an MPA does
not guarantee fishers’ compliance, and its effectiveness can be eroded by illegal fishing.
Indeed, the ecological performance of MPAs has been linked to fishers’ compliance. In
this talk I explore the levels and drivers of fishers’ compliance with MPAs. By studying
12 coastal MPAs in Costa Rica, I investigate the roles of different variables in influencing
fishers’ compliance. Compliance levels were higher in MPAs: (1) with multiple livelihoods, (2) where government efforts against illegal fishing were perceived to be effective,
(3) where fishing was allowed but regulated, (4) where people were more involved in
decisions, and (5) that were smaller. I also provide a novel and practical measure of
compliance: a variable formed by the number of illegal fishers and the frequency of
illegal fishing. I underline the centrality of people’s behavior in nature conservation, and
the importance of grounding decision-making on the social and institutional realities of
each location.


PHYLOGENY AND EVOLUTION OF THE CORAL FAMILY LOBOPHYLLIIDAE
(Abstract ID: 28618)
The family Lobophylliidae is a widespread and ecologically important group of scleractinian corals. It is undergoing a major taxonomic revision thanks to the combination
of molecular phylogeny reconstructions and novel morphological data. In this study we
examine specimens of many different lobophylliid genera and species collected from
numerous localities throughout the Indo-Pacific and the Red Sea. Sequencing of several
molecular loci (both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA) is combined with detailed exami-


13

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Here we developed a concise set of ecological and biological criteria of identifying
areas significant for biodiversity conservation. Four criteria were based on habitat
characteristics and another four based on species’ feature. To assess these criteria, We
propose five key biodiversity variables: habitat cover, species attributes, species richness,
geographic range and population abundance. We used data derived from open-access
biodiversity informatics databases and applied our framework to the Coral Triangle
region. We used a modelled geographic distribution of 12,783 species to map species
richness, and 39,452 points of occurrence of 1,742 species to generate distribution
and mangrove forests) was used to assess the habitat distribution. Spatial analysis and
multi-criteria evaluation were developed to objectively and systematically prioritise areas
with high biodiversity conservation values. We found that ecoregions of Papua, Eastern
Philippines, Halmahera, Banda Sea and Salomon Sea were the high priority areas for
biodiversity conservation. The criteria and key biodiversity variables proposed here are
a potential tool to facilitate the identification of additional important areas for marine
biodiversity and contribute to minimizing gaps in ecological representativeness within
the protected areas networks.

nation of skeletons at macromorphologcial, micromorphological, and microstructural
scales. Phylogenetic relationships among taxa within the Lobophylliidae are proposed
and discussed in an evolutionary framework. Molecular and morphological datasets
are mostly in agreement and allow the discovery of new species in the generaAcanthastrea, Echinophyllia, and Lobophyllia, whereas some taxa, erroneously synonymized with
other ones, are resurrected. In one case, a deep genetic divergence does not reflect a
morphological distinction, allowing the discovery of a new cryptic genus from the Indian
Ocean and the Red Sea. The obtained data represent a considerable improvement in the
understanding of the evolution of this coral family and reveal hidden biodiversity and
unexpected biogeographical patterns.

RESOURCE USE, INCIDENTAL RESILIENCE AND THE DANGERS OF ACCIDENTAL CONSERVATION IN THE LAKSHADWEEP REEFS (Abstract ID: 28562)


While identifying the last pristine reef refugia in a rapidly changing climate is critical,
finding models to manage more typical reefs (with high resource-dependent human
communities) is a more urgent imperative. The Lakshadweep Islands are a possible
model reconciling livelihoods and reef resilience. We tracked reef responses to repeated
bleaching events since 1998, documenting considerable resilience, due to high herbivory,
high predator density, and adequate settlement areas. This resilience is an unplanned
consequence of a fisheries programme in the 1980s to promote a pelagic tuna fishery.
Tuna quickly replaced reef fish as the dominant fishery with epiphenomenal reef
resilience benefits. However, responding to new markets, fishers have, since 2010, begun
to exploit reef fish once again. This return to reef fishing is characterised by a qualitative shift in the relationship fishers have with the reef. While past reef fishing was for
domestic consumption, the majority of the catch today supplies international markets,
exploited merely as an economic commodity. Our studies further show that with two
generations of disuse, traditional institutions of resource control no longer exist across
the archipelago. Without these restrictions, after 4 years of fishing, we documented major
declines in the many target groups. This threatens to unravel the resilience the reefs
currently possess. While the Lakshadweep case study is a possible model of a workable
win-win solution, it is a cautionary tale of the potential dangers accidental conservation
interventions can hold.

ROVING PREDATORS RELOADED: AN INVESTIGATION OF SHARK AND JACK
POPULATIONS IN SHALLOW (0-30M) AND MESOPHOTIC DEPTHS (30-100M) IN
THE HAWAIIAN ARCHIPELAGO (Abstract ID: 28880)
Coral reef roving predators (sharks, jacks, snappers) are generally believed to be depleted around human population centers. In Hawaii, most of the data to support this conclusion comes from underwater visual censuses of shallow water reef ecosystems (0-30m).
However, information on the density and distribution of mobile predators in mesophotic
depths (30-100m+) remains sparse. Survey techniques suitable for mesophotic surveys
or may only cover a relatively small number of sites per day. A simple, low-cost alternative approach suitable for a wide range of depths is the use of baited remote underwater
stereo-video systems (stereo-BRUVs). Between 2012–2014, we deployed stereo-BRUVs
to assess roving predator populations around the main Hawaiian Islands (MHI; Maui,
Lanai, Molokai, Oahu) and the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands (NWHI; French Frigate
Shoals, Lisianski Island/Neva Shoals, Pearl and Hermes Atoll, Midway Atoll), targeting
sites previously surveyed by divers (0-30m), along with mesophotic sites (30-100m).
Stereo-BRUVs surveys found several species of roving predators are significantly more
abundant in mesophotic habitats than in shallow habitats. Although results corroborate
diver surveys that roving predators are much more abundant in the remote NWHI than
in the populated MHI, the greater depth coverage and diver independent nature of
stereo-BRUVs surveys provides much more information and more accurate estimates of
relative abundance than was previously available.


LOW SCLERACTINIAN CORAL DENSITY IS ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED
DENSITY OF A COMMON REEF FISH PARASITE (Abstract ID: 29823)
Live scleractinian coral cover is declining worldwide. While loss of stony coral cover is
positively associated with decreasing fish diversity and abundance, the effects on smaller
reef organisms are less-well studied. Gnathiid isopods are small external parasites that
feed on the blood of a wide range of host fish species. Unlike many external parasites,
they associate with hosts temporarily, spending most of their lives in benthic substrate. In
spite of their impact on hosts and ecological importance, little is known about the factors
that influence their distribution and abundance on coral reefs. We quantified the density
of the Caribbean gnathiid, Gnathia marleyi using light traps deployed on shallow reefs in
the US Virgin Islands, and characterized the benthic habitat and fish communities associated with each sample. Among the twelve variables examined, live coral cover was the
best predictor of gnathiid density, with gnathiid density increasing with decreasing coral
cover. Gnathiid density was negatively correlated with daytime fish abundance, but positively correlated with nighttime fish abundance. In a parallel study using fish-baited traps
in the central Philippines, live coral was also a significant predictor of overall gnathiid
density. These findings corroborate laboratory studies showing that gnathiids avoid and
are consumed by live coral and suggest that live stony coral or a close associate may be
a limiting factor in gnathiid density. Live coral may thus serve as a refuge from parasitism
for reef fishes.

com
com

HELIOPORA PHASE SHIFT ON A PHILIPPINE CORAL REEF? (Abstract ID: 29710)
Ecological shifts in the face of climate change have usually been discussed in the context
of algal-coral phase shifts particularly as a consequence of ocean acidification and
thermal anomalies. Our observation of the reef in Bolinao is different from what has
been widely proposed in the literature. Algal cover has remained low when compared
to the suggested threshold of an algal-phase shift. In this paper we propose a different
ecological shift, which may be considered an intermediate phase towards an algal-coral
phase shift. A Heliopora phase shift and the mechanism is different from what has been
proposed for algal phase shift. While coral-algal phase shifts are associated with the loss
of top-down control mechanisms such as overfishing and others like soft corals and
sponges shifts are implicated to bottom-up dynamics, Heliopora phase shift is driven by a
different mechanism, the warming of sea water as confirmed by laboratory experiments,
cover and community structure of a Bolinao Reef, Northwestern Philippines. We suspect
this to be caused by the long-term increase of sea surface temperature in the West
Philippine Sea region by approximately 2oC during the past two decades.



DELINEATING PRIORITY AREAS FOR MARINE BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION

PROTECTING THE LONG TERM HEALTH OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF

A challenge in implementing marine biodiversity conservation is in identifying representative networks for biodiversity protection with standardized and consistent criteria.
14

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

THROUGH RESTORATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF ADJACENT COASTAL
ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 28624)

CORAL REEF OF SARAWAK, BORNEO (Abstract ID: 27877 | Poster ID: 79)
Sarawak is one of the biggest state in Malaysia, located between the latitude 0º 50’and
1051km in Malaysia, thus the EEZ of Sarawak occupies the southern part of the South
China Sea with an area of 160,000 km² (area 124,449.5 sq km). The coral reef biodiversity was studied from 2004 to 2015. The aim was to collect baseline data on the corals
and coral associated living resources. Study area were divided into four areas, Kuching,
Bintulu to Miri, Luconia and Lawas. Most of the coral reefs in Sarawak are found
offshore, with the depth more than 18m and geographically patchy.

The health and resilience of the Great Barrier Reef are critically dependent on the
catchment’s coastal ecosystems and the quality of water discharged from the catchment.
In the past, little regard has been given to the role coastal ecosystems in the catchment
have on the health of the Great Barrier Reef. It is estimated that approximately 40% of
remnant vegetation in the Great Barrier Reef catchment had been cleared by 2009, and
74% of the catchment was used for grazing. Of the 424,000km2 that makes up the Great
Barrier Reef catchment less than 10% is protected as National Park. Much of the ecological services of the Great Barrier Reef catchment have been lost or heavily modified
and this is reflected in the declining health of the Great Barrier Reef, particularly inshore
areas. Today there is an increased public appreciation for the influence the catchment
has on the receiving waters of the Great Barrier Reef and its biodiversity. The Great
Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority places considerable importance on a coordinated
and collaborative approach to the management of the catchment and Reef. The Authority has collaboratively developed a set of principles and decision-making tools to assist
natural resource managers, decision makers, landowners and managers, to enable them
to restore, maintain or enhance the environmental values and ecological functions of
coastal ecosystems to support the long-term health of the Great Barrier Reef.


LEADERSHIP IN HAWAI‘I CORAL REEF FISHERIES (Abstract ID: 29901)
Leadership is often touted as a solution to fisheries and coral reefs management
problems. However, most leadership research exhibits an embedded normative bias
and skews analysis towards the individual. Further, few studies observe leadership as
a construct or empirically examine its component parts. Here, leadership is observed
in the context of coral reef fisheries co-management in the main Hawaiian Islands. In
Hawai’i, an institutional pathway allows communities to partner with the State of Hawai’i
to co-manage coral reef fisheries. However, few successful partnerships have emerged
in the past 25 years despite enabling legislation, a set of highly motivated communities,
significant NGO and foundation support, and seemingly a multitude of local leaders. To
investigate local leadership in Hawai’i coral reef fisheries, 45 interviews were conducted
over three years with individuals from NGOs, academia, government, and fishing communities across Hawai’i. Respondents were asked about the importance of leadership
in the context of co-management, and other leadership components derived from the
academic literature. Although respondents offered some diverse viewpoints, there was
general agreement that leadership functioned well when local leaders acted as facilitators or organizers and possessed a wide network of relationships. These findings support
the conceptualization of leadership as a process in coral reef fisheries. Findings from
this paper should contribute to better understanding of effective local level leadership in
coral reef fisheries co-management.


SKELETON ULTRASTRUCTURE OF CORALLINE RED ALGAE MIRRORS MOLECULAR BIOLOGICAL PHYLOGENY (Abstract ID: 28281)
Coralline red algae are calcifying, globally occurring algae well suited for ecological and
climatological studies. Classification mainly focuses on the soft tissue anatomy of their
reproductive cavities, secondary connections between filament cells (secondary pit
connections or cell fusions) and the existence of genicula. Contrary to morphologically
based taxonomy molecular studies suggest that except conceptacle characters none of
the common features used are diagnostic for specific families, creating often paraphyletic
and polyphyletic morphological clades. SEM analyses of epithallial cells, meristem cells
and the vegetative thallus show that the calcite crystallites formed within the polysaccharide matrix of the corallinacean cell walls are taxon specific. This analysis is based
on a global sample set including the genera Phymatolithon, Lithothamnion, Lithophyllum,
Titanoderma, Spongites, Porolithon, Hydrolithon, Neogoniolithon, Mastophora and Sporolithon. While it is generally assumed that epithallial cells roofs do not calcify, our results
show that they fully calcify in nearly all genera and the calcite crystallites have distinct
genus specific shapes. Together with the cell wall crystallites, these epithallial crystals
can thus be used as a taxonomic tool on at least a generic level and, thus, offer to be a
powerful morphological tool for the classification of calcareous red algae. Furthermore,
a comparison of the observed ultrastructure morphology with phylogenetic trees based
on molecular data of extant coralline red algae shows a clear match.

com


EFFECTS OF SCHOOLING AND HABITAT CONFIGURATION ON THE BEHAVIOR OF PARROTFISH TOWARDS PREDATORS (Abstract ID: 28122)

ASSESSING REEF FISH RESILIENCY AND PRODUCTIVITY IN THE PHILIPPINES
(Abstract ID: 29123 | Poster ID: 576)

Predation risk has been shown to inhibit locally the foraging activities of roving
herbivores, but the effects of predator identity, schooling, and habitat configuration on
the behavior and microhabitat selection of herbivores has not been directly tested. We
examined the behaviors of solitary and schooling juvenile parrotfish in the presence of
either a grouper (ambush predator) or snapper (roving predator) and without predators.
coral, massive coral, and rubble) arranged in six different configurations such that each
microhabitat type varied in their degree of contiguity. We determined the microhabitat preference of parrotfish for foraging and refuge. We found that the anti-predator
responses of parrotfish were stronger towards snapper than grouper, often resulting in
parrotfish hiding under corals at the expense of foraging, especially when rubble patches
are contiguous. Schooling mitigated the predation risk effect of snapper although the foraging rate of focal parrotfish was still lower than when predators were absent. Parrotfish
did not show significant microhabitat selection in the absence of predators but preferred
to forage on rubble in the presence of either predator. Results show that predation risk
effects are dependent on predator identity, presence of conspecifics, and habitat configuration. Microhabitat use was context-dependent and such fine-scale decisions may
be important in determining the grazing patterns of parrotfish.

The Coral Reef Visualization and Assessment (CoRVA) Program – Reef Fish Resiliency
and Productivity (Project 3) is a nationwide effort initiated by the Biodiversity Management Bureau of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (BMB-DENR),
to assess the existing reef fish community status in the Philippines. The project aims to
evaluate the resilience and productivity of reef fish communities in selected National
Integrated Protected Areas System (NIPAS) sites and within Verde Island Passage (VIP)
which is designated as an important biodiversity corridor. The undertaking employed
intensive collection of reef fish community and biological data deemed important in
providing insights on the relative resilience of reef fishes. Information generated from the
project is expected to contribute in the preparation of important management strategies
necessary to ensure reproductive success, habitat health, and sustainability of reef fisheries in the country. The project integrates current information on adult community and
trophic structure; reef fish recruitment and habitat association; and age at first sexual
maturity of selected iconic reef fishes to obtain a better perspective on the present state
of reef fish communities in specially managed sites across the country. In the first year
of its implementation, both trainings and assessments have been conducted in four
managed and open access reefs.


15

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


SPECIES BOUNDARIES IN TABULAR ACROPORA SPECIES IN OKINAWA (Abstract
ID: 29103)

EFFECT OF BOOSTER BIOCIDES, IRGAROL ON CORALS FROM MALAYSIAN
REEF, SOUTH CHINA SEA, AS INDICATE BY FATTY ACID MARKERS (Abstract ID:
27971)

The molecular revolution has greatly increased our understanding of evolutionary
relationships in the Scleractinia, however, in some taxa, such as the genus Acropora,
molecular markers for distinguishing species have yet to be developed. Consequently,
progress in establishing species boundaries in these genera will require alternative
approaches, such as detailed observations of the timing of reproductive events and
cross-breeding trials. Here, we used gross morphology, morphometrics, breeding trials
and six molecular markers to explore the species boundaries in the tabular Acropora
species complex in Okinawa. Gross morphology suggests at least 4 different groups,
morphometric analyses suggest two to four groups, breeding trials suggest two or three
groups, however, the two molecular markers analysed to date suggest that all 24 colonies
belong to one species. The most likely explanation for these patterns is that rare hybridization events homogenise the gene pools of groups that are otherwise biologically and
morphologically distinct. We conclude that a number of lines of evidence are required
to establish species boundaries in corals and the boundaries chosen will depend on the
question of interest.

Changes of fatty acid composition in the reef building coral Galaxea fascicularis that
was exposed to the boster biocide, Irgarol 1051 was determined. Laboratory exposure
from Bidong Island, Malaysia had higher fatty acids profile compared to its non-healthy.
polyunsaturated fatty acids, and the mean concentration of these fatty acid significantly
decreased after the coral was exposed to the biocide (p< 0.05). It is proven that corals
that exposed by Irgarol 1051 have significantly higher concentration of monounsaturated
fatty acids (p< 0.05), might due to the colonization of bacteria on the dead parts of the
coral. The present findings demonstrate that Irgarol 1051 threatens the health of corals
on metabolisms of the corals.

com


COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN THE MARINE PROTECTED AREA (MPA)
ESTABLISHMENT PROCESS IN INDONESIA: ITS OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES (Abstract ID: 27874 | Poster ID: 665)

CORAL BLEACHING EVENTS IN KANEOHE BAY, OAHU HI: WHAT HAVE WE
LEARNED? (Abstract ID: 28807)

MPA legislation in Indonesia includes provision for community involvement in the
and the extent to which the establishment of MPA has become more democratic
and decentralized. Research sites were selected based on different levels of MPA; they
are:national-level MPA at Savu Sea,district MPA at Derawan,and village no-take areas at
Pangkep. It was found that MPA legislation provides opportunities for communities to be
informed and consulted in the establishment process. However,this falls short of the active participation that is required in order for MPAs to be successful. Field research results
showed that complex web of legislation from different levels of government influenced
the participation. Gaps in legislation and mismatches with other national legislation have
meant that legislation is only applied for national-level MPAs. However,no provision for
community involvement in their managements and thus, no incentive for communities
to participate. Degree of participation depend on available budget. MPA establishment
teams had to prioritize the use of limited funding that led to work with government
agencies, whose support was needed to override mismatches in policies and legislation
that might threaten the existence of MPAs. Consequently, community participation was
considered a secondary priority. To enhance participation in the MPA, communities still
rely heavily on government and NGOs to improve their capacity to participate meaningfully. Commitment from these stakeholders is required to build community capacity to
play a leading role in the MPAs.

The occurrence and severity of mass coral bleaching has increased dramatically over
the last two decades with almost every reef region in the world suffering extensive
bleaching and mortality. The first coral bleaching event in Kaneohe Bay occurred during
1996 and was followed by more severe events in 2014 and 2015. Generalizations based
on the 1996 event did not hold during the 2014 event. Likewise, the patterns observed
in 2014 diverged from what we thought was learned from the previous two events.
The unexpected patterns of bleaching and mortality were due to a number of factors
including: 1. Localized patterns of water circulation, 2. Variation in irradiance due to
different patterns of cloud cover and temporal variation in turbidity, 3. Differences due
to seasonal timing and duration of the warm water event, 4. Influence of localized fresh
water flood events interacting with temperature bleaching, 5. A shift in species sensitivity
to high temperature. The reefs of Kaneohe Bay have shown remarkable resilience to a
wide variety of natural and anthropogenic insults over the centuries, but the pressing
new question centers on whether coral reefs can survive under continuously increasing
temperature and ocean acidification along with changes in sea level, precipitation and
more severe storm activity predicted under climate change models.

com

PATTERNS OF CORAL BLEACHING IN AMERICAN SAMOA (Abstract ID: 28835 |
Poster ID: 353)
The ongoing global coral bleaching event began in the North Pacific in the summer of
2014 and expanded to the South Pacific and Indian Oceans in 2015. The NOAA Coral
Reef Watch outlook indicates it is likely to continue well into 2016. An ecosystemscale assessment of coral populations in American Sāmoa from February to March
2015 provides crucial information about the distribution and abundance of corals and
the prevalence of bleaching at multiple spatial scales to affected genera and species.
A two-stage stratified random sampling design was employed to survey 188 sites
across 5 islands/atolls: Ofu-Olosega, Rose, Swains, Ta’ū, and Tutuila. The stratification
scheme incorporated island sectors, three reef zones (fore reef, back reef, and lagoon),
and three depth categories (0–6 m, >6–18 m, and >18–30 m), where present. Coral
10-m2 belt transects per site. Population prevalence of bleaching for all scleractinian
corals combined was 5.47% (SE 0.61%), ranging from 66.04% to 0% among genera, and
from 66.67% to 0% among selected species. The most affected genera include Isopora,
Montastraea, Leptoseris, Fungia, Pavona, Pocillopora, and Porites. Bleaching prevalence
varied across islands/atolls, strata, genera, and species. These results provide a quantitative assessment of bleaching patterns across habitat space, genera, and species during
the survey period. In addition, the spatial pattern of bleaching identifies potentially
vulnerable and resilient reefs in American Sāmoa.

MANIPULATION, INTRODUCTION, AND FATE OF THERMOTOLERANT ALGAL
SYMBIONTS IN REEF-BUILDING CORALS (Abstract ID: 30023)
The ability of some reef corals to undergo changes in their algal symbiont communities
in favor of thermotolerant Symbiodinium is one mechanism by which corals may survive
bleaching events and persist into the future despite continued warming. To investigate
the dynamics of these unusual symbionts we used a novel transplantation method to experimentally introduce thermotolerant symbionts into healthy corals. We used controlled
bleaching at 32oC to remove the ‘native’ Symbiodinium C3 from replicate cores of the
Caribbean coral Montastraea cavernosa, and recovered them at 29oC with thermotolerant
these manipulated cores into control (unbleached) cores containing C3, and vice versa
(N=20 pairs from 5 colonies). The fate of these introduced symbionts, measured in
mini-transects across cores using quantitative PCR, was dependent on (1) temperature,
with D1a displacing C3 within 3-6 months when maintained at 29oC , but C3 displacing
D1a at 22oC; (2) the relative abundance of introduced vs. resident symbionts; and (3)


16

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

and unreliable trade figures, as well as the lack of clear management policies and regulations. This study determined the status and sustainability of target reef fishes for the
aquarium trade by comparing the level of exploitation and standing stock in four sites,
namely, Lian, Batangas; Bongao, Tawi-Tawi; Cawayan, Masbate; and Kawayan, Biliran.
Underwater fish visual census (FVC) was conducted to estimate densities of target fishes
on the reefs while fisheries surveys using semi-structured interviews and focus group
discussions were used to obtain information on the aquarium trade. Results show that
target aquarium species varied across municipalities, majority of which belonged to the
families Pomacentridae, Labridae, Pomacanthidae and Chaetodontidae. These families
generally had low densities on the reefs, implying that fishes marketed for the aquarium
trade are being sourced from areas outside the municipality. In fact, average weekly
demand during peak season is significantly higher than actual densities observed on the
reefs. High catch rates influenced by the demand from the aquarium trade may make this
reef-dependent livelihood unsustainable in the long term. Continuous monitoring, as well
urgent regulations on the aquarium trade if these reef fishes were to persist.

the type of symbiont introduced. As thermotolerant symbionts become more common
on disturbed reefs worldwide, these findings help us understand their origin and spread,
investigate their relative costs and benefits to reef ecosystems, and consider potential
interventions to help reefs survive continued warming.

MULTI-DECADE MONITORING OF REEF-BUILDING CORALS ON THE FLORIDA
KEY REEF TRACT (Abstract ID: 28786)
The Florida Keys reef tract is a highly degraded ecosystem with low coral cover on
most reefs, which has been attributed to warm-water bleaching, cold-weather events,
coral diseases, and anthropogenic sources of nutrient influx. Using a data set that has
been sampled seasonally for over 20 years, we look at tissue biomass, chlorophyll a
content, maximum photosynthetic capacity of PSII (Fv/Fm), Symbiodinium density,
and dominant Symbiodinium genotype of three reef-building coral species (Orbicella
spp.) in the Florida Keys. Data has been collected during two of the three worldwide
bleaching events and shows anomalies in coral biomass and Symbiodinium measurements. Biomass of deep and shallow reef-building corals had lowest biomass following
the 1997-98 worldwide bleaching event but steadily increased and exceeded original
biomass between 1998 and 2014. Interestingly, Symbiodinium density and chlorophyll a
content have remained consistent despite an increase in tissue biomass. Fv/Fm initially
decreased following the 1997-98 bleaching event but leveled out and have remained
relatively constant. During 1997-98 and 2014-15 bleaching events Fv/Fm fell to
extremely low values indicating that, like temperature, a Fv/Fm threshold may also exist.
Long term monitoring of reef-building corals is key to understand how corals respond to
environmental stress and their recovery over long periods of time.


DEVELOPMENT OF MICROSATELLITE PROTOCOLS FOR CORAL MADRACIS
COMPLEX (Abstract ID: 28327 | Poster ID: 337)
After the declaration of the Colombian Marine Protected Area-MPA Deep Coral Natural
National Park (PNNCP) in 2013, it became evident the need to develop a management plan for this MPA in the Colombian Caribbean. One of the interesting features of
this MPA is that the main structural species belong to the coral complex Madracis sp
This group brings a special habitat to many species of fishes and marine invertebrates in
this ecosystem, distribution, genetic diversity and connectivity in Colombia and the
Caribbean. Here we present the main results from the development of new molecular
markers (microsatellites) for some Madracis species, following methods previously
developed at The University of Manchester for the deep coral Lophelia pertusa. DNA
extractions were carried out at the Colombian Institute of Marine and Costal Research –
INVEMAR, using samples from the Cnidarian reference collection at the Marine Natural
History Museum of Colombia-MHNMC (INVEMAR), collected from Tayrona Natural
Manchester from Madracis corals maintained in aquariums. The new markers will allow
us further ecological analysis to increase the knowledge of these Caribbean coral formations and will help us to determinate the vulnerability and resilience of these habitats to
natural and anthropogenic effects this new Natural National Park.


REEFS OF FUTURE PRESENT: HONG KONG CORALS FROM THE QING DYNASTY TO THE INFORMATION AGE (Abstract ID: 30014)
My geologist friends tell me that Hong Kong has no ‘proper’ coral reefs. This is because
there is no evidence of carbonate formations upon which living corals are still found.
Instead, corals grow on exposed bedrock in a patchy distribution and any exposed
carbonates are quickly eroded away. Were there proper coral reefs in the past? Consider
that during the Qing Dynasty the industrial production of slaked lime was extensive
throughout Hong Kong, yielding 40 tons per year from mining living bivalve and coral
communities. Indeed, historical records and archaeological evidence describe a very
different environment in the past; where apex predators, megafauna, and diverse reef
invertebrates were common. Through archeological digs, we show that the diversity and
abundance of corals and other invertebrates declined markedly over the last century,
including the extirpation of several coral species. We analyzed subtidal push cores to
show that coral abundance has decreased by 50%, and coral fragment identification
from sediments to delineate a 40% contraction in the range of important staghorn corals.
Today, coral decline is closely linked to coastal development and pollution, which limits
the recovery of coral communities. However, thanks to government efforts at improving
water quality, we demonstrate that active restoration of coral communities is possible.
Through targeted propagation and transplantation we show that staghorn corals have
high rates of growth and survivorship in areas where they were previously eliminated
giving hope to the future of these marginal reefs.

com

IMPORTANCE OF SYMBIONT GENETIC STRUCTURE IN RESTORATION OF
CORAL POPULATIONS (Abstract ID: 28916)
The short- and long-term success of any restoration project involving corals may
depend on choosing the appropriate genetic source to be compatible with the site
under restoration. Species vary in their dispersal rates and distances, and hence in the
degree of genetic differentiation among populations. Acropora palmata, as do many
species of corals, forms a symbiotic relationship with single-celled dinoflagellates of the


DETERMINING THE SUSTAINABILITY OF REEF FISHES FOR THE AQUARIUM
TRADE IN SELECT SITES IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29132)
Aquarium trade heavily relies on coral reef resources. In the Philippines, a top exporter
of aquarium fish, the sustainability of this trade is a concern due to its capture methods
17

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

genusSymbiodinium. The symbiont provides the coral its main source of carbon compounds; however, the two organisms have different life history traits that can influence
their geographic distribution. We estimated the population genetic structure of Acropora
palmata and its dominant symbiont Symbiodinium ‘fitti’ along the Caribbean coast of
tool to assess genetic variation of source populations. In the animal host, we detected a
single genetic cluster among 7 reefs as a result of high levels of gene flow. However, the
endosymbiont showed a genetically structured population under isolation by distance
with 5 clusters detected. These results suggest that sexual recruits should be introduced
at an early stage so that they will take up the locally available symbionts. Furthermore,
these results imply that care must be taken in choosing destination reefs for restoration
efforts involving fragments or late-stage recruits so as not to alter gene flow patterns
among the symbiont populations.

FORAMINIFERAL HEALTH ASSESSMENT INDICES AND SEDIMENT GEOCHEMISTRY OF CORAL REEF-SUPPORTING TAMANDARE BAY (NE, BRAZIL). (Abstract
ID: 29130 | Poster ID: 287)
This study aimed to assess spatial and temporal ecosystem health variability of water
and sediment in the coral reefs of the Tamandare open embayment, located in Northeast Brazil, Southwest Atlantic Ocean, using geochemistry and benthic foraminifera as
bioindicators. Sediment samples were collected at the reef base, generally built over
beachrock structures, during the summer and winter of 2005. The FORAM index (FI,
a foraminiferal functional group, community-based water quality assessment), and the
FORAM Stress Index (FSI, which is more related to ecological affinities than to functional groups and assesses sediment or substrata quality) and geochemical data were interpreted using uni- and multi-variate analysis. This is the first application of FSI outside
of Mediterranean waters. The dominance of the Quinqueloculina and Textularia genera,
along with negligible numbers of living specimens, low counts of symbiont-bearing foraminifera (and thus low FI), high turbidity and high phosphorus concentrations confirm
the anthropogenic influence of river inputs. All parameters suggest that the water and
sediment of the Tamandare embayment are marginal for coral population settlement,
and the FSI presents higher values and a more sustainable condition for summer than
winter. The FI indication of marginal environmental health is not in agreement with
the FSI and the currently stable coral population found over the underlying beachrock,
especially of the established no-take zone. Local scientific- and community-based coral
conservation initiatives have improved ecosystem health.


INTERSPECIFIC BACTERIAL COMPETETION UNDER OCEAN ACIDIFICATION
SCENERIOS (Abstract ID: 29510 | Poster ID: 143)
Coral microbes have been hypothesized to promote coral health and protect the host
against pathogens. Recent outbreaks of coral diseases have been correlated with higher
sea-surface temperatures and ocean acidification but few studies focus on the effect
of these stresses on coral commensals physiology. This study examined the impact of
ocean acidification on two coral commensals’ ability to prevent infection by the coral
pathogen Vibrio shiloi. Beneficial bacteria Pseudoalteromonas ZJ6102 and Pseudoalteromonas euthinica were isolated from the surface of healthy Acropora cervicornis and,
in dialysis tubing maintained at high (pH=8.1) or low (pH=7.7) pH under stable temperatures (25.5°C). Colony forming units (CFUs) of each strain were calculated 24, 48 and 72
hours after inoculation. Results showed that lower pH tends to boost commensals ability
was estimated visually and indirectly using a PAM underwater fluorometer to assess
algae deterioration by the pathogen. Results showed higher photosynthetic activity for
corals treated with both the pathogen and commensal compared to controls treated with
the pathogen only. Studies such as these will help our understanding of coral microbial
dynamics in response to environmental changes.


CHARACTERIZATION OF RECREATIONAL SPEARFISHING IN A SUBTROPICAL
ROCKY REEF (Abstract ID: 29980)
Spearfishing is a highly selective activity, but the selectivity does not necessarily make it
a sustainable one, as the majority of defenders of this fishing method claim. This study
aimed to evaluate which traits make fished species more or less attractive to spearfishers
and the relationship between fishermen expertise and characteristics of the catch in
rocky reefs in the Southeastern Atlantic. The investigation was carried out in the Marine
Extractive Reserve of Arraial do Cabo (23oS; 42oW). In terms of abundance, scarids
was caught by most, and captured fish biomass was mainly composed of herbivores
and macro-carnivorous fish. The main attributes that make a species a preferential target
were, firstly, pelagic habitat, larger size and a tendency to form schools. Our study had
also shown a direct relation between the fishers’s experience and catch composition,
where experienced spearfishers catch mainly fish with larger sizes and weight. Old spearfishers recognize that stocks of targeted fish have reduced throughout time, and clear
indication that environmental reference is changing, a phenomenon global reported.
Spearfishing generally means a selective fishing, but it is high dependent on fishermen.
To minimize the effects of spearfishing on target species and to enhance protection of
functionally important fishes, spearfishing needs restrict controls on the catch.


BRAZILIAN MPAS EFFECTIVENESS: A CASE STUDY IN SÃO PAULO (Abstract ID:
29386 | Poster ID: 641)
The establishment of marine protected areas (MPAs) in Brazil is still negligible, just over
31% of the target set by the National Biodiversity Commission to protect 10% of the
coastal zone by 2020. Most of them are terrestrial area and only 1.57% of the 3.5 million
square kilometers of territorial sea is represented. The coast of São Paulo State (SP)
has 700 km long and a great diversity of ecosystems, which are increasingly threatened
due to its strategic location in relation to major industrial centers of the country, the
connection to port systems and the exploration of oil in the pre-salt Santos Basin. Only
0.7% of the territorial sea is included in three restrictive MPAs. However, before to create
new MPAs it’s necessary to evaluate the effectiveness of existing ones. In this sense,
areas were evaluated through a selection of indicators, which were organized into scenarios matrix and associated with a standard score corresponding to the best or worst
possible situation to be found. The management scores attained effectiveness of 68%
(Tupiniquins Ecological Station), 71% (Tupinambás Ecological Station) and 72% (Laje
de Santos Marine State Park). The main common factors that compromise the complete
fulfillment of the objectives of the studied areas are the lack of an integrated coastal
management with other economic sectors and low government resources allocated.
However, they are surrounded by sustainable use areas, which ensure certain integration
of MPAs with an ecosystem approach.


GOVERNANCE ANALYSIS USING THE FISH CHAIN METHODOLOGY: PNG’S
BÉCHE DE MER INDUSTRY (Abstract ID: 28079)
Markets for Béche de Mer (BDM, dried sea cucumber) are vital to coastal communities in Papua New Guinea (PNG). Many of these communities are remote from trade
routes and have extremely limited economic opportunities. Dried BDM is high value
and shelf stable, making it one of the few commercially feasible exports from such
locations. Moreover, some of the most valuable species of BDM are easily accessible
from shore, meaning the fishery has been open to people without access to boats, such
as women, children and old people, and so the income from BDM has been distributed
relatively equitably. As ethnic Chinese markets for BDM grew over recent decades
PNG’s remote coastal communities came to rely heavily on this resource for cash
incomes. The management system was, however, not effective and stocks collapsed. In
2009 the PNG government closed the fishery. Surveys conducted in 2015 indicate some
recovery and the government is considering reopening the fishery in the near future, with
a revised management plan. This project uses a ‘fish chain’ methodology to consider
all of the various influences along the supply chain affecting governance of the fishery,
including village-level cultural and economic contexts, business models for exporters and
importers, and capacity issues for relevant government agencies. Findings and methods
developed in this study are relevant for understanding why fisheries operate the way they
do, where practice changes may be effectively encouraged or enforced, and by whom, as
well as areas that are more resistant to change.


18

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



IDENTIFYING COST EFFECTIVE ACTIONS TO MITIGATE LAND-BASED
SOURCES OF POLLUTION IN WEST MAUI THROUGH DECISION MODELS
(Abstract ID: 28555)

GENOMICS OF LOCAL ADAPTATION IN POPULATIONS OF ACROPORA MILLEPORA FROM THE GREAT BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 29490)

Coral reefs are declining across the world. Causes of coral reef decline are complex, and
establishing direct causal links between deleterious inputs, events, or actions, and these
declines, is challenging. However, it is clear that a cocktail of land-based sources of
pollution presents serious threats to coral reef ecosystems, and addressing these has become a key management challenge worldwide. In the face of high levels of uncertainty
in both action feasibility and future change, decision models can facilitate improved
outcomes over the long term. We applied a decision science approach to address land
based pollution within a watershed planning initiative, with the objective of identifying
a suite of feasible actions and policy measures that will ensure healthy coral reefs that
support livelihoods over long time horizons. In West Maui, Hawai`i, nearly one quarter
of all living corals have been lost in the thirteen years prior to 2008. The Watershed
Planning process includes the values and objectives of local stakeholders and decision
makers, and aims to quantify and explicitly address uncertainty in parameter estimates
and causal relationships, and the risks, or consequences, of delayed action or failure of a
given action. We present the first phase of this work.

Local adaptation of coral populations inhabiting disparate reef environments could
be the major source of genetic diversity to fuel rapid adaptation to climate change. To
investigate this possibility, we performed genome scans using 2bRAD in populations
of Acropora millepora from six locations along the Great Barrier Reef representing a
variety of thermal and water quality conditions. We then undertook common garden
and reciprocal transplantation experiments to see whether variation at the candidate loci
identified by the genome scan were associated with fitness and/or gene expression variation among locations. The clearest genome scan signal, combining both high genetic
divergence and elevated linkage disequilibrium, was obtained for two adjacent singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located within a cluster of paralogous genes encoding
delta-9 desaturases (d9d), enzymes that adjust the fluidity of biological membranes in
response to ambient temperature. These SNPs formed a latitudinal gradient of allele
frequency and were associated with elevated baseline expression of two d9d genes at
a cooler, higher latitude, location. These genes also exhibited gene expression plasticity
aligned with this baseline change: they were up-regulated in corals that were transplanted
from a warmer to a cooler location. Thus, evolution of elevated baseline expression of
these genes at a cooler location may represent a case of genetic assimilation, whereby
regulatory adaptation is based on a pre-existing plastic response.



INEQUITY IN CO-MANAGEMENT OF CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28240)
Co-management has been promoted as a more equitable form of coral reef management because it provides local communities with greater power over the use and
allocation of their resources. Yet co-management arrangements can exacerbate
existing inequalities across regions and communities, and the benefits associated with
co-management are not always equitably distributed. Here, we surveyed 790 resource
users in 43 coral reef co-management arrangements across five countries to examine
the benefits that resource users report from co-management, identifying departures
(either losses or gains) from those of the wider community as inequity. We then evaluate how social and institutional factors contribute to actual and perceived inequity in
benefits from co-management. We find that inequity is driven by contextual conditions
boundaries, and the rules in use), and individual socioeconomic conditions (wealth and
involvement in decision-making). Managers and policy-makers can use some of these
conditions, particularly institutional designs and individual socioeconomic characteristics, to inform the development of more equitable collaborative arrangements to manage
and sustain coral reefs.

SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL SETTLEMENT PATTERNS OF SCLERACTINIAN AND
BLUE CORALS IN NORTHWESTERN PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29523)
The Philippines is part of the coral triangle area with the highest coral biodiversity. Coral
recruitment is important in structuring reefs by coral replenishment and recovery from
degradation. In this study, spatial and temporal settlement patterns of scleractinian and
blue corals in the northwestern Philippines were quarterly monitored for 3 years (2006
deployment and retrieval of settlement plates every 3 months. Results showed that the
settlement patterns significantly differ among years, monitoring periods, and sites. Settlement patterns decreased from year 1 to year 3 and peaked between February to May.
Settlement pattern of scleractinian and blue corals coincide with the peak of spawning
season observed in the study sites. Among sites, Caniogan had the highest settlement
which is mostly composed of Pocilloporidae (brooders) and Others (unidentified corals).
Blue corals that are also brooders were only observed at Balingasay and Malilnep probably explained by the presence of adult corals only on these sites. Results suggest that
self-recruitment on the reef. High settlement in Caniogan can be attributed to its location
that is relatively embayed among sites. Therefore, coral settlement is affected by the
presence of adult colonies, timing and modes of reproduction and site attributes such as
exposure to wave actions.


SOLUBLE ADENYLYL CYCLASE IS AN EVOLUTIONARILY CONSERVED PH SENSOR IN THE CORAL POCILLOPORA DAMICRONIS (Abstract ID: 29984)
Reef-building corals experience daily fluctuations in intracellular pH (pHi) due to photosynthesis by intracellular symbiotic algae of the genus Symbiodinium, yet little is know
about the cellular mechanisms used by corals to detect and regulate acid/base homeostasis. Here we found that the enzyme soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC) is essential for sensing
and regulating pHi in the coral Pocillopora damicornis. Expression of sAC was detected
throughout all coral tissues, including gastrodermal cells that house the Symbiodinium,
and calicoblastic cells that support calcification. Application of the sAC-specific inhibitor
KH7 to isolated coral cells resulted in significant and reversible intracellular acidosis in
both Symbiodinium-containing and Symbiodinium-free coral cells. Furthermore, inhibition
of sAC in cells exposed to light impaired pHi regulation in Symbiodinium-containing
gastrodermal cells, indicating a role in sensing photosynthesis-induced pHi disturbances.
Finally, sAC inhibition prevented the recovery of pHi following intracellular acidification during exposure to acidified sweater, indicating that coral sAC is also a sensor and
regulator of pH disturbances from external origin. The presence of sAC in all coral cell
types, together with its responsiveness to physiological pH changes, makes it an excellent
candidate to sense acid/base disturbances and initiate multiple homeostatic responses.
These mechanistic studies are particularly important for understanding the capacity of
corals to withstand and adapt to environmental stressors such as ocean acidification.


ASSESSING CORAL REEF RESILIENCE TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION IN THE
PALAU ARCHIPELAGO (Abstract ID: 29545)
Climate change-driven shifts in ocean chemistry are projected to significantly affect
the structure and function of coral reef ecosystems. Reef scientists and managers are
increasingly assessing the resilience of coral reef ecosystems to climate change, yet most
do not consider the effects of ocean acidification. For the first time, we present a reef
resilience assessment that includes coral community tolerance to ocean acidification in
Palau. Using five years of water sampling data, we mapped spatial and temporal patterns in temperature, salinity, and carbonate chemistry for the entire Palau archipelago
and combined information about Palau’s coastal environment with benthic community
ecology and coral biology data. Archipelago-scale coupled physicochemical, ecological,
and biological data allow us to map relationships between patterns in pH and coral
community structure, reveal coral reef sensitivities to natural gradients in carbonate
chemistry, and identify areas of potentially high resilience to ocean acidification impacts.
Our results will be used to support coral reef conservation efforts in the region, specifically, identifying conservation priorities in Palau. The effective management of coral reef
ecosystems in Palau is critical to support social and ecological resilience.


