corals forms the base of the tropical reef ecosystem. Yet, despite their importance to the
host, the majority of these symbionts are horizontally transmitted. We followed symbiont
uptake in Orbicella faveolata and Acropora palmata recruits in the lab and field in the
Florida Keys. Lab assays demonstrated that prior infection does not limit the ability of the

64

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

TRACKING THE SIGNALING CARGO OF EXTRACELLULAR SYMBIONTS INTO
HOST TISSUES (Abstract ID: 28617)
Animal-microbe symbioses are fundamental to animal physiology but how and where
bacteria interact with their host, remain largely elusive. The mutualistic association
between the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes and its luminous bacterium
Vibrio fischeri is a powerful model to investigate signaling between the host and its
microbial symbiont. In this system, bacteria are acquired via horizontal transmission
within hours of hatching and colonize the light organ as an extracellular partnership.
Here, we combined TEM and NanoSIMS imaging to visualize 15N-labeled bacterial
products within the tissue of newly-hatched squids. The nuclei of epithelial cells in the
light organ were highly enriched in 15N with hotspots localized in the nucleolus as early
as 2 h following inoculation. Closer examination revealed labeling was concentrated in
the euchromatin regions of the nucleus, where DNA is often under active transcription.
We also exposed squid to 15N-labeled outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) extracted from
Interestingly, 15N-enrichment patterns were similar to squid inoculated with intact bacteria. We are now exploring the species-specificity of these labeling patterns using other
bacterial species. The unique link between spatial and functional information provided
by the NanoSIMS technology has the potential to open a new frontier for the study of
communication between host and symbiont.

REGAL PHYLOGEOGRAPHY: RANGE-WIDE SURVEY OF THE MARINE ANGELFISH PYGOPLITES DIACANTHUS REVEALS EVOLUTIONARY PARTITIONS
(Abstract ID: 29229)
The Regal Angelfish (Pygoplites diacanthus; family Pomacanthidae) occupies reefs
from the Red Sea to the central Pacific, with distinct color morphs in the Indian Ocean
to Red Sea and Pacific Ocean. To assess population differentiation and evaluate the
possibility of cryptic evolutionary partitions in this monotypic genus, we surveyed
mtDNA cytochrome b and two nuclear introns (S7 and RAG2) in 547 individuals from 15
locations. Phylogeographic analyses revealed four mtDNA lineages (d = 0.006 – 0.015)
corresponding to the Pacific Ocean, the Red Sea, and two admixed lineages in the Indian
Ocean, consistent with known biogeographical barriers. Both S7 and RAG2 showed
strong population-level differentiation between the Red Sea, Indian Ocean, and Pacific
Ocean. The only consistent population structure within these three regions was at the
Society Islands, where surrounding oceanographic conditions may reinforce isolation.
Coalescence analyses indicate a Pacific expansion (1.71 Ma) that gave rise to a Red
Sea lineage (1.44 Ma) followed by a radiation of two lineages that currently occupy the
Indian Ocean (0.93 – 0.72 Ma). Persistence of a Red Sea lineage through Pleistocene
glacial cycles indicates a long-term refuge in this region. The affiliation of Pacific and
Red Sea populations, apparent in cytochrome b and S7 invokes the possibility that the
Indian Ocean was recolonized from the Red Sea, possibly more than once. Assessing
genetic architecture in this widespread monotypic genus reveals cryptic evolutionary
diversity that merits subspecific recognition.


VARIATION IN BIODIVERSITY OF CRYPTIC REEF FISHES ALONG A RED SEA
ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENT (Abstract ID: 28628)


Small cryptic reef fishes are one of the most underestimated communities in coral
reef studies due to their small size, biases in sampling, and cryptic nature. This is
particularly true in the Red Sea, where previous surveys to comprehensibly document
fish assemblages have been limited to visually conspicuous species. We conducted
standardized collections of small and cryptic fishes to formally identify fish communities
and compared results along a gradient of oceanographic and ecological environments.
To help resolve taxonomic difficulties, genetic techniques were used in addition to morphological characteristics to identify and catalog individuals. Approximately 200 OTUs
(operational taxonomic unit) from 35 families were collected, identified, and vouchered.
Abundance and diversity increased from the clear oligotrophic reefs in the north to
the shallow turbid reefs in the south. Community composition differed among regions,
largely driven by relative abundances damselfish and gobies. Only 40% of the OTUs
could be confidently assigned to species. The diversity of this understudied group plays
a potentially important role in the ecology of reef fish assemblages, particular in the
transfer of energy between trophic groups, but our current understanding of this role is
limited by the lack of taxonomic clarity. This study has established a valuable collection
of vouchered specimens with the potential to uncover new species and confirm new
records in the Red Sea. Overall, further work in this area will help to place the Red Sea in
a wider biogeographic context.

DISPERSION OF SEAGRASS PROPAGULES AND CONNECTIVITY AMONG
MEADOWS IN THE GREAT BARRIER REEF WORLD HERITAGE AREA,
Severe tropical storms and floods in north- eastern Australia between 2007 and 2012
damaged or destroyed seagrass meadows along hundreds of kilometres of coastline.
The subsequent deaths of turtles and dugong have led to the very status of our iconic
Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area being questioned. We examined how meadow
loss at this scale may re-establish from the dispersion of propagules floating in the water.
We conducted a study based around Townsville and Abbot Point in North Queensland
using a 2 dimensional numeric model developed for studying water movement. We released virtual propagules in the model between August and November 2011 with actual
wind and current data. Model results suggest connectivity between offshore meadows
and inshore meadows is likely to be low, limiting their ability to provide a reservoir of
propagules. Time of year, location of release and the location of the propagule (surface
or sub-surface) influenced movement. Over an 8 week model duration most propagules
remained between 30 and 60 kilometres of their release point but distances up to 950 kilometres were possible. Most movement was to the north –west. An initial analysis identified where propagules from many source meadows accumulate and re-establishment
would be more likely and where meadows were not well connected to other meadows.
We report on the value of this exercise and management implications.


FRESH GROUNDWATER IMPACTS ON INORGANIC CARBON DYNAMICS IN
COASTAL HAWAI’I (Abstract ID: 29995 | Poster ID: 380)
The shoreward margin of coral reefs contain many habitat types within a short distance,
are affected by freshwater inputs, and can be heavily impacted by humans interactions.
The aragonite saturation, a factor influencing how easily organisms can produce calcium
carbonate, in this region depend on the salinity and the concentration of total inorganic
carbon (TCO2) in groundwater. To determine the impact of freshwater on TCO2 dynamics
between the shore and reef, total alkalinity and pH were measured in the morning along
transects at six sites around Hawai’i Island. The pH of fresh groundwater differed among
the sites, between 6.8-8.2 at the shoreline and increasing to 8.2 at the reef. At all sites,
aragonite saturation was lower than open ocean conditions, and on average lower than
most coral reefs worldwide. The magnitude of aragonite saturation decrease depended on
watershed characteristics (geology, land use, precipitation) that controlled the groundwater
pH and TCO2. To determine how TCO2 in fresh groundwater discharge varies across
Hawai’i, USGS measurements of pH and alkalinity from coastal wells were used to calculate TCO2 of each aquifer unit. The well data and estimates from the nearshore data were
significantly correlated. Statewide, only a few locations, including the Waianae coast of
Oahu, have higher TCO2 than seawater, potentially buffering the impact of ocean acidification. Concerted effort to collect samples statewide and analyzed with a consistent method
is needed to identify priority sites for monitoring the effects of ocean acidification.


EL NINO IMPACT ON CORAL REEFS OF THE CENTRAL PACIFIC –USE OF SENTINEL 2, A TEST IN THE MARQUESAS (Abstract ID: 30162 | Poster ID: 344)
Last December, a powerful El Niño Southern Oscillation combined with waxed ambient
sea surface temperatures entailed significant anomalies across the equatorial Pacific Ocean
which are likely to stress hard coral reefs, cascading in the symbiotic algae expulsion
65

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

(bleaching). Given the remoteness and spread of coral reefs, remote sensing has increasingly been advocated for monitoring the dynamics of these ecosystems. A decade ago, the
Landsat-7 satellite allowed the typology and bathymetry to be rendered as a world atlas by
leveraging a 30-m spatial resolution. However, both this spatial resolution and the spectral
dimensions remain too coarse to understand the benthic heterogeneity process occurring
at the coral colonies scale and time series analysis was not conducted. The Sentinel-2
sensor has the potential to improve monitoring of the coral reefs ecology thanks to the increased spatial resolution and number of wavebands, and the European Space Agency has
tasked ARGANS Ltd with support of the Italian CNR and un. of Tartu to develop the EO
data processors, un. of Queensland being involved in their validation. Meanwhile, given the
very likely thermal stress event, monitoring of the 2015-2016 coral bleaching in the central
Polynesia), South Kiribati and Norther Cook Islands. Field spectra and photoquadrats of
shallow coral reef habitats in the Marquise isles enabled to “calibrate” the Sentinel-2 data
alongside Landsat, as well as the very high spatial resolution Pléiades1.

CORAL REGULATION OF THE CALCIFYING FLUID IS AFFECTED BY SEAWATER DISSOLVED INORGANIC CARBON CONCENTRATION (Abstract ID: 28014)
In the context of ocean acidification, it is important to understand how modifications of
the carbonate chemistry affect the mechanisms of calcification in corals, and how such
effects at the cellular level are translated to the organismal level. To better understand
the calcification mechanism of corals it is critical to determine the extent to which both
biological and environmental factors influence the chemistry of the calcifying fluid (CF),
where the skeleton forms. To distinguish the effects of varying seawater dissolved inorganic carbon concentration [DIC] from varying seawater pH, we manipulated seawater
[DIC] while maintaining seawater pH constant and measured the responses of photosynthesis, calcification, and pH in the CF (pHCF). Photosynthesis and calcification in the
light and dark increased as a function of [DIC]. pHCF measured by confocal microscopy
also increased with [DIC]. A second phase of experiments will be run to determine the
effects of seawater [DIC] manipulations on the [DIC] in the CF using geochemical tools;
the preliminary results will be reported during this presentation. This study shows that in
addition to seawater pH, [DIC] can also modify chemical conditions in the CF, which in
turn modulate the calcification rate of organisms. Understanding the key mechanisms
controlling coral calcification is critical to making further progress in determining the


EVOLUTIONARY ADAPTATION POTENTIAL: FROM NOVEL SCIENCE TO PRACTICAL APPLICATION (Abstract ID: 29799)


Earth’s ecosystems—and their ability to provide services and benefits—are changing
at an alarming rate due to a combination of local stressors and global climate change.
Perhaps the most pressing question in conservation and management is: how can we
design our actions to help species survive and continue to provide the services upon
which humans rely? We believe that the answer lies in designing management actions
to encourage billions of evolutionary match/mismatch tests, allowing nature to draw
from diverse portfolios to pick winning combinations of genes and species that will
persist into the future. However, there is little in the way of a comprehensive scientific
theory that describes how population size, demographic connectivity, and diversity
the probability of finding successful evolutionary combinations and propagating those
across environmental mosaics. Similarly, there is limited guidance available for managers
and conservation professionals about actions they could take to promote adaptation
via natural selection. In this talk, we will synthesize ideas presented in this session and
discuss how this information can help to design conservation and management actions
that will promote coral adaptation via natural selection.

A FRAMEWORK TO ASSESS RIDGE TO REEF ECOSYSTEM HEALTH IN AMERICAN SAMOA (Abstract ID: 29509)
A coupled approach to assessing ecosystem health and functioning of coral reefs is
important in prioritizing and protecting resources that millions of people are dependent
upon for livelihood, cultural, and aesthetic uses. In American Samoa, the proximity of
development and growing human population to watershed stream discharge areas predisposes reef communities to be adversely affected by non-point sources of pollution.
This project aims to develop an ecosystem health index using water quality and coral
reef monitoring protocols that can be used to assess the current status of streams and
coral reefs, pinpoint specific sources of degradation, and provide spatially-explicit threat
models highlighting areas where these stressors occur. Main tasks to be accomplished
under this grant include: development of a framework to assess ecosystem health,
training workshops on field monitoring and analyses methods, field surveys of coral reef
and watershed sites in Tutuila, compilation and analyses of survey results for assessment
of ecosystem health at the watershed level, and building local capacity in monitoring,
analyzing, and disseminating results. The final products of this project will include: a
comprehensive ridge to reef framework and baseline data that can be used to predict
significant drivers of threat to ecosystem health at the watershed scale and a training
toolkit using the ecosystem health monitoring criteria. The identification of the most
important causes of reef impairment can help make informed decisions using innovative
tools and comprehensive datasets that can enable systematic prioritization for protection
of valuable coral reef resources in American Samoa.


A PHYLOGENOMIC BACKBONE FOR SCLERACTINIA BASED GENOME AND
Stony corals (Order Scleractinia) have been studied for decades because of their
fundamental role in reef building and their excellent fossil record extending back to the
Triassic. Nevertheless, our understanding of scleractinian evolution and taxonomy has
changed profoundly with the recent advent of molecular phylogenetics. However, most
phylogenetic studies to date are still based on only a handful of mostly mitochondrial
loci and tend to focus on individual coral genera and families with very few studies addressing deeper nodes. A robustly supported phylogeny of the deepest nodes is therefore
still missing. Here, we present the first Scleractinia phylogeny based on genomic data.
Our dataset is comprised of newly sequenced RNA-Seq data for deep and shallow
water Scleractinia and published genome and RNA-Seq data from other stony-coral and
outgroup lineages. At present, our phylogenetic analyses include 27 samples that span 10
scleractinian families and additional sequencing is currently underway to further extend
our taxonomic range. Phylogenomic matrices so far contain between 73 and more
than 2500 exclusively Metazoan orthogroups that are shared by 50-90% of all samples.
Our results provide a well-resolved, robust, phylogenomic backbone for Scleractinia,
addressing long-standing questions about the monophyly of the so-called complex and
robust clades as well as resolving the position of particular groups such as the family
Pocilloporidae.


KEY PREDICTORS OF EXTINCTION RISK IN SEA BREAMS AND PORGIES (FAMILY: SPARIDAE) (Abstract ID: 27787)
Identification, understanding and prediction of the factors that drive species to heightened
risk of extinction are important goals for conservation, especially since few areas on the
planet remain unaffected by human activities. Global extinction risk assessments of an entire family of marine fishes (Family: Sparidae), using the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List process, showed that 8.6% (13 species) of sparids were threatened.
All have increased vulnerability to population declines from intense fishing pressure and
habitat destruction. A further 7.9% were classified as Near Threatened. The majority of the
sparids (69.5%) were assessed as Least Concern, while the remaining 21 species (13.9%)
were listed as Data Deficient. In addition to presenting the first global assessment of sparid
extinction risk, a Random Forest model was used to identify correlates of extinction risk
in the Sparidae using 33 biological and threat variables. The model correctly classified
up to 90% of Red List category placements and showed complex interactions between
intrinsic and extrinsic predictors. Larger body size was the most important predictor of risk.
Additional predictors included generation length, longevity, rocky reef habitat, recreational
fishing, climate change, harvesting, area of occupancy, and lower depth limit. This analysis
is the first time a predictive model of extinction risk has been applied to marine fishes and
presents an opportunity to identify and mitigate threats affecting similar groups of highly
valued and ecologically important marine fishes.


66

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



RELATIVE RESILIENCE POTENTIAL AND CLIMATE VULNERABILITY OF CORAL REEFS ALONG THE WEST COAST OF HAWAI‘I ISLAND (Abstract ID: 28558)

NOT ALL CORALS DINE IN: VARIATION IN NICHE PARTITIONING BETWEEN
CORALS AND THEIR SYMBIODINIUM INDICATES A RANGE OF SYMBIOSES
(Abstract ID: 29304)

NOAA coordinates activities and expertise in the West Hawai’i Focus Area on the
NW side of Hawai’i Island to address objectives on coral health, climate change and
community capacity. To support and help guide these efforts, we have assessed the ecological resilience potential of 40 sites in this area by examining indicators of resilience
in anthropogenic stress and projected future climate stress influences exposure and
resilience. We found: 1) exposure to anthropogenic and projected climate stress is higher
in the northern part of the survey area than in the south, and 2) resilience potential
varies greatly across the survey area. The assessment results are used to identify and
tailor management strategies to improve resilience at low resilience sites and maintain
resilience at high resilience sites. We have an expansive engagement plan to socialize
and disseminate the project results in a strategic way to key stakeholders, including local
community members. These communication and capacity building efforts are critical to
increase support for and compliance with any management strategies implemented in
the near future. This multi-disciplinary project uniquely combines recent advances in resilience science and application with climate modeling and social science. This powerful
case study describes how scientists, managers and local community members can work
together to examine and then reduce the climate vulnerability of coral reefs in Hawai’i.

The symbiosis between corals and Symbiodinium has allowed coral reefs to achieve high
levels of productivity and diversity in oligotrophic habitats. By sharing resources, corals
and Symbiodinium access novel niche space. Some have argued that the coral-algal
interaction ranges from mutualism to parasitism. Trophic niche theory predicts that
mutualist symbionts would occupy the same niche space as their host (shared resources)
whereas commensal symbionts would occupy a different niche (fewer shared resources).
To test this hypothesis, we measured the δ13C and δ15N of separated coral tissue and
symbiont cells from 6 coral genera commonly encountered in Hong Kong. Using Stable
Isotope Bayesian Ellipses in R (SIBER) analysis, we compared the isotopic niche placement and area of each host and symbiont pair. Our results supported the hypothesis: in
some genera (Acropora and Goniopora) the host and symbiont had nearly 100% overlap
of their isotopic niches implying shared nutritional resources, while in others (Platygyra
and Favites) there was no overlap. Finally, some genera (Pavona and Porites) have partial
overlap suggesting a flexible symbiosis. These patterns were driven by nitrogen, not carbon. Indeed, the difference between the δ15N values of host and symbiont was positively
correlated with calyx volume, suggesting that smaller polyps evolved to support obligate
symbioses while larger polyps enable corals to meet their nutritional requirements
through alternative means.



THE EFFECTS OF JAPANESE STYLE MPAS AND ACANTHASTER PLANCI ON
CORAL COVER IN ISHIGAKI JAPAN (Abstract ID: 30081 | Poster ID: 451)
Marine Park Zones (MPZs) have been set up by the Japanese Ministry of Environment
around the small island of Ishigaki in the Ryukyu archipelago in the attempt to protect
dwindling populations of coral in the area. This study attempts to determine whether or
not the management scheme has been successful. A combination of field surveys and
existing time series data analysis has shown that the coral reef community appears to
grow and decline independently of the MPZ system. An outbreak of Acanthaster planci
occurred in 2009 on the leeward side of the island and it disparately affected the coral
cover of protected and non-protected sites with the protected sites losing 32.040% of
their coral cover and non-protected sites losing only 1.243% of their coral cover from
placi the coral cover increased by 10.024% from 2009 to 2010. Through further analysis
ecosystem time to rebound.

DEVELOPING A CONCEPTUAL MODEL FOR CORAL REEF MONITORING IN
THE MEXICAN MESOAMERICAN BARRIER REEF SYSTEM (Abstract ID: 29897 |
Poster ID: 523)
The Mesoamerican Reef System (MRS) is the second longest barrier system in the
world and provides a variety of ecosystem services to adjoining nations. Ecosystem
at the Mexican coast. The absence of effective MRS monitoring systems has been a
limitation for its conservation. Conceptual models are a key element of coral reef monitoring programs since they integrate current understanding of system dynamics, identify
important processes, facilitate communication of complex interactions, and illustrate
connections between indicators and ecological states or processes. Well-constructed
conceptual models provide the scientific framework for monitoring programs and the
justification for the choice of indicators. This poster contribution presents the design of
It thereby uses an innovative approach to fill the knowledge gaps of linking both types
of reef data: reef field assessments and remote sensed data. The proposed model not
only links scales and spatial dynamics, but also highlights main local impacts. From this
perspective, the conceptual model to monitor the MRS will support decision makers to
implement strategies for improved management, and to identify and prioritize the more
changing and affected components.


FORGING PARTNERSHIPS TO LAY A FOUNDATION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
SUCCESS (Abstract ID: 29626)
The marine environment and the incomes of coastal communities in the Eastern Caribbean (EC) have benefited from partnerships established at the national and regional level
under the Eastern Caribbean Marine Managed Areas Network (ECMMAN) project. 5
regional and international organizations with varying mandates in collaboration with
governmental and non-governmental organizations in 6 EC countries have unified as one
implementing unit with the shared objective to create a network that more than doubles
the area of effectively managed marine managed areas while providing for improved
livelihood opportunities. In order to build an effective partnership, each organization
brought complementary strengths that contributed to building an effective mechanism
for project implementation. The organizations 7 collective core areas of strength are
local knowledge and experience, environmental policy, scientific research, training and
education,sustainable financing, and public awareness and outreach. Some lessons
learned from this collaboration included the need to: establish ground rules from the
start, establish clear and open channels of communication, clearly define roles and
responsibilities, immediately resolve issues, respect each other’s organizational norms,
and think outside of the box for creative solutions to problems. These collaborative
actions have resulted in a uniquely strong, effective, nimble partnership that benefits conservation and management of the marine and coastal resources across organizational
missions and international boundaries.

MITIGATING PRESSURES IN HIGH TRAFFICKED AREAS USING CUSTOM
DESIGNED REEFS (Abstract ID: 27842 | Poster ID: 468)
Where diving and coral reef tourism are particularly intense, the ecosystems are often
overexploited and seriously degraded. On the island of Koh Tao, in the Gulf of Thailand,
we have been developing custom designed reefs as alternative centres for tourism focus
and ecosystem rehabilitation. Koh Tao entertains upwards of half a million visitors per
year on a 21 km2 island. Much of the degradation is attributable to excessive numbers of
poorly managed divers and snorkelers and the consequences of their visitation. Zoning
plans and user guidelines help but limited resources for policing and enforcement have lead
to the need for reef restoration programs and the development of artificial reef. Research
67

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

better understand the ecological processes that are important in the structuring of reef
flat and reef slope communities; and iii. Tagging to provide fundamental information
needed to understand the ecology of sharks and turtles. The program will also provide
information on interdependencies among different parts of the reef as well as long-term
trends in corals, fish and iconic megafauna. A key component of the partnership is
the engagement of local community members who have become ambassadors of the
project. PhD scholars are also embedded in each research theme to provide training for
the next generation of scientists. An overview of the community engagement program
including those established in local schools will be presented.

has shown that these locations assist in mitigating pressure and providing ecological solutions to localised reef degradation. Further they enhance awareness of conservation issues
across a broad spectrum of the stakeholders from visitors, to local residents and government officials. Research also highlights the ecological value artificial reefs can have on
marginalised reef communities. The development of artificial reefs on Koh Tao has been
enacted primarily without external funding support and provides a template for use in other
locations where resources, especially financial, are limited but willingness is high.


ACTIVE REEF RESTORATION: IMPROVING THE OUTCOME FOR DEGRADED
REEFS IN THAILAND (Abstract ID: 27783)
The threatened ecosystems of coral reefs are particularly vulnerable in those locations
where anthropogenic pressures are acute. On the island of Koh Tao, in the Gulf of
Thailand scuba diving and coral reef related tourism places ever increasing pressure
on the fragile reefs that surround this 21km2 island. Conservation groups in collaboration with local businesses, universities, scientists, government officials and community
groups implement a range of reef restoration tools and activities that aim to increase the
resilience of the reefs around the island. Using coral and giant clam nurseries, artificial
reefs and a suite of monitoring tools conservation has developed into a mainstay of the
economic model of this scuba diving dependent location. Developing artificial reefs
combined with active reef restoration has released pressure from vulnerable natural
reefs. These artificial locations allow opportunities for novel and innovative reef restoration techniques while providing welcome respite for overexploited reef environments.
We explore the potential for truly community based tourism and conservation groups to
develop these multi faceted targeted artificial reefs to ecologically support the recovery
of natural reefs in this heavily perturbed environment.

MACROECOLOGICAL PATTERNS OF SEA URCHINS SPECIES IN SHALLOW
REEF ENVIRONMENTS (Abstract ID: 28724)
Sea urchins are known to greatly influence benthic communities, mainly by controlling
algal cover, both in tropical and temperate reefs. Despite this importance, there is a
knowledge gap concerning their macroecological patterns. The relative importance of
sea urchins on the dynamics of benthic cover may vary locally and regionally due to
functional redundancy and relative abundance of species. In order to assess diversity
patterns of sea urchins in tropical and temperate reef systems, we analysed a compilation of open databases, published and unpublished data. Regular sea urchin species
occurring above 100m were selected for the analysis, consisting of 175 species (15
families, 7 orders). Tropical reefs from the Central Indo-Pacific showed highest species
richness, longitudinally decreasing towards the west. Species richness decreased from
low to high latitudes, similarly to patterns found for reef fishes and mollusks. Provinces
of the Central and Western Indo-Pacific showed the highest levels of endemism, and
the least structured data in ordination analysis. Temnopleuridae was the most speciose
family, but Cidaridae was the most widespread globally. The wide latitudinal range of
Toxopneustidae and Diadematidae species – often associated with urchins’ blooms and
barren formations – may indicate potential higher resilience of these taxa on tropical
reefs. Macroecological patterns of species richness associated to functional diversity
may help to explain known spatio-temporal variabilities of sea urchins, and its potential
effects on high versus low diversity regions.


CHARACTERIZING BENTHIC INVERTEBRATE COMMUNITIES OF THE SOUTH
TEXAS BANKS (Abstract ID: 28993 | Poster ID: 327)
The South Texas Banks (STBs) are a rare hard bottom feature of the Gulf of Mexico
(GOM) colonized by a community of deep water corals whose multi-species, highdensity assemblages provide structurally complex habitat and significant ecosystem
services. The depth of the banks, a persistent nepheloid layer, and strong currents have
hindered efforts to collect quantitative data on what inhabits the rocky outcrops and relic
coralgal reefs. The STBs were under consideration as a candidate for Marine Protected
Area (MPA) status in 2008, but there was not enough information available to support
this conservation action. Using a remotely operated vehicle, video data from 5 banks
were collected in order to characterize the benthic communities. Community structure
analyses show significant differences in benthic community composition between the
two southern and the three northern banks surveyed. Also, by correlating the benthic
communities’ data with terrain patterns from multibeam sonar images, a habitat suitability model was created to predict the probability of presence of important coral species.
This work significantly reduces the cost, time and effort in characterizing the banks,
which is key to ensuring that these habitats are protected. The ability to create habitat
suitability maps and discern biodiversity of the South Texas Banks from multibeam


CONTROLS OF CORALLINE ALGAL CALCIFICATION: ROLE OF INTERNAL PH
IN INFLUENCING RESPONSES TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION AND OTHER ENVRIONMENTAL VARIABLES (Abstract ID: 28055)
Coralline algae are important in forming/binding reefs and provide a settlement
acidification through declines in net calcification rates. However they exhibit large variation in their responses, some of which could be explained by their physiology. Integral
in the response of coral net calcification to ocean acidification is the capacity to elevate
the pH of the calcifying fluid (pHcf) at the site of calcification; it is unknown whether
the same principle applies to coralline algae. We ask: 1) do coralline algae elevate pHcf
at the site of calcification in the cell wall; 2) how are changes in net calcification rates of
coralline algae under OA related to changes in seawater pHT and calcifying fluid pHcf;
and 3) what role does latitude, species, and wave exposure play in influencing pHcf and
how is this related to net calcification? We examined the responses of net calcification
and pHcf to ocean acidification, and compared pHcf with net calcification rates from
the field for different species from various latitudes across a range of wave exposures.
We find the majority of coralline algal carbonates have high d11B values (25 to 34
‰), implying high pHcf values (>8.5) if only the tetrahedral B(OH)41- is incorporated.
However, coralline algae precipitate calcite, rather than aragonite like shallow water corals, meaning high d11B trigonal B(OH)3 may also be incorporated. We also discuss how
coralline calcification rates relate to pHcf from the field and under elevated CO2.


INTEGRATING KNOWLEDGE FROM SHALLOW REEFS, THE MESOPHOTIC
ZONE AND CHARISMATIC MEGAFAUNA IN THE CONSERVATION OF A WORLD
HERITAGE AREA: NINGALOO OUTLOOK PROJECT (Abstract ID: 29149)


Ningaloo Reef Marine Park, declared a UNESCO World Heritage Area in 2011, has
unique biodiversity values, abundant marine life and is the only fringing coral reef on
the west coast of a continent in the world. Much remains unknown about the reef and
its inhabitants, with most research focusing on single elements and missing interactions
in this complex ecosystem. A strategic research partnership between BHP Billiton and
CSIRO is gathering new knowledge on shallow and deep water habitats, and shark and
turtle populations to better equip those responsible for the conservation and management of the marine park. This talk will present an overview of the key objectives of the
three research themes, and findings to-date: i. Deep Reefs research documenting the
extent and character of deep water habitats; ii. Shallow Reefs gathering knowledge to

A COMPARISON OF STAGHORN CORAL FECUNDITY AND SPAWNING OBSERVATIONS FOR WILD, OUTPLANT, AND NURSERY COLONIES (Abstract ID: 28806
| Poster ID: 490)
The staghorn coral (Acropora cervicornis), a foundation species on Greater Caribbean
coral reefs, has experienced population declines to a level where natural population

68

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

the first evidence for rhodopsin-based color vision in vertebrates. Understanding how
fishes perceive their world and how this allows them to adapt to different environments
is crucial for future management purposes, especially since many fish species are facing
imminent danger due to anthropogenic activities.

recovery is uncertain. With a listing of Threatened under the US Endangered Species
population restoration efforts. Nurseries have been identified as a productive restoration
method by increasing colony abundance and by reducing the spatial gap between populations, increasing the likelihood of successful sexual reproduction. The survivorship
of outplanted colonies has been well documented; however their sexual reproductive
capacity is not fully understood. We are addressing this information gap by comparing
histologically derived gamete abundance and colony fecundity data with in-situ spawning
offshore southeast Florida. During 2014 wild colonies were highly fecund and mass
spawned, outplant colonies had low fecundity and were not observed to have spawned,
while nursery colonies were fecund and partially spawned. During 2015 wild colonies
were fecund and partially spawned, outplant colonies had low fecundity and were not
observed to have spawned, while nursery colonies were fecund and partially spawned.
Stress associated with higher than average water temperatures in 2014 and 2015, colony
ages, and colony fragmentation and transplantation history likely contributed to differences between colony types.

USA

THE OUR FLORIDA REEFS COASTAL USE SURVEY: AN ONLINE SURVEY TO
SUPPORT STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SOUTHEAST FLORIDA (Abstract ID: 30172 | Poster ID: 591)
Coral reefs are an important resource world-wide. Unfortunately, coral reef conditions
are declining in many areas due to both global and local stressors. The objective of this
study was to survey stakeholders in southeast Florida to better understand reef use in
the region. Stakeholders spatially identified where and how often they conducted their
activities. These data were compiled and analyzed in GIS to determine spatial use patterns. Both location and intensity of use were analyzed to determine which areas may
be under greater stress from recreational activities. It was found that reef use was not
evenly distributed in the region, but clustered around inlets and piers. Reef use differed
that use in the Broward-Miami Coral Reef Ecosystem Region was spread out over a
wider spatial scale than the use in the regions north and south. These data are important
as they have the potential to inform the recommendations being made to improve coral
reef management in southeast Florida. The study can provide a better understanding of
human-environmental relationships and the trade-offs involved so that recommendations can better decrease user conflicts, maximize economic productivity, and preserve
the environment.


BENTHIC DIVERSITY SPECIES IN TIDE POOLS FROM REEF PLATFORM ON
61)
The Brazilian northeastern coast has many coral and sandstone reefs, where the top reef
platform remains exposed during low tides. This study analyzed the diversity and distribution of benthic species in tide pools on the Sereia sandstone reef, coast of Maceió,
Alagoas, Brazil. During two low tide periods in November 2015, by visual recordings, on
12 tide pools were analyzed the sessile and sedentary organisms by coverage percentage, and when necessary some specimens were collected for taxonomic confirmation
in the laboratory. All tide pools were measured length, width and depth to include in
smaller and bigger size. The water abiotic aspects were obtained to each tide pool studied including temperature, pH and salinity. The software Past 2.17 was used to calculate
the diversity data to richness, Shannon index and evenness. Linear regression was
obtained with the same program. In this study, 27 taxa of macrobenthic organisms were
recorded including: 4 Chlorophyta, Rhodophyta 2, 6 Phaeophyta, 3 Porifera, Cnidaria
8, 2 Mollusca and Echinodermata 2. The results for the linear regression showed that
the depth had a significant relationship with richness (r = 0.82; p <0.005) and Shannon
index (r = 0.82; p <0.005). The data obtained for the tide pools indicated the depth as
the main factor that influenced positively the richness and diversity of species. This was
probably because the depth inside the tide pools protects the macrobenthic species from
the impacts and stress caused by exposure during the low tides and by the brake waves
associated with the high hydrodynamics local.


CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF THE 2014 MASS BLEACHING EVENT IN
PAPAHANAUMOKUAKEA MARINE NATIONAL MONUMENT (Abstract ID: 29602)
2014 marked the third reported mass bleaching event in Papahānaumokuākea Marine
National Monument (Northwestern Hawaiian Islands), which is one of the world’s
largest marine reserves. Warming began in the central islands in late August 2014 and
extended to northern atolls by early September. Cumulative thermal stress from satellitederived temperature data ranged from 7 degree C weeks at French Frigate Shoals to 15
degree C weeks at Lisianksi Island by October 30th. To assess the temporal patterns in
bleaching and resulting mortality, we surveyed permanent sites at French Frigate Shoals
(FFS), Lisianski Island (LIS), Pearl and Hermes Atoll (PHR), and Midway Atoll (MID)
in September 2014 and August 2015. In 2014, the mean % of severely bleached corals
was 8, 22, 37 and 45% at FFS, PHR, MID and LIS, respectively. Mean % of severely
bleached corals increased moderately and significantly with sustained high temperatures,
but varied among habitats with shallow forereefs surrounding LIS and backreefs at PHR
and MID most affected. While Montipora spp. were most affected, this event was unlike
previous events due to widespread bleaching across 22 species. In August 2015, we
did not observe widespread bleaching or thermal stress. While corals in certain regions
demonstrated recovery and minimal mortality, mean % coral cover at permanent sites
impact of bleaching-induced mortality on habitat structure. Coral mortality directly correlated with reductions in both habitat complexity and volume.


VISUAL EVOLUTION: LESSONS LEARNED FROM 100 FISH GENOMES (Abstract
ID: 29528)
Imagine living a thousand meters below sea level surrounded by darkness but for
a few bioluminescent rays of light. Now imagine living in a clear mountainous lake
three thousand meters above sea level where the plethora of light can cause blindness
anytime. There are many examples of animals that have adapted their vision to cope
with different light conditions, yet little is known about the molecular basis of these
adaptations. Thanks to recent technological advances, it has now become feasible to
study the evolution and function of vision, along with its underlying molecular machinery (opsins and the visual pathway genes), one-on-one, in nature. Here, we report the
evolutionary history of opsin genes based on the comparison of 100+ genomes and 40
transcriptomes spanning the teleost fish phylogeny. We show that the evolutionary history of opsins is very dynamic, involving frequent duplications but also gene losses that
correlate with the light environment of different species. In particular, several deep-sea
fish lineages have evolved ingenious strategies to adapt to the extremes of their photic
environments, including one case of multiple rhodopsin duplications, which may well be


UNDERSTANDING THE CONSEQUENCES OF LAND-BASED POLLUTANTS ON
CORAL HEALTH IN SOUTH KOHALA, HAWAI‘I (Abstract ID: 30045)
Increasing human populations in Hawaii’s coastal regions combined with ineffective land
use practices has resulted in deteriorated water quality and impaired reef health through-

69

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

out the state. Land-based pollution is of particular concern in Puakō, Hawai’i Island due
to land use change, strong evidence of sewage pollution, and a 50% decline in coral cover
during the last 40 years. In this study we: 1. identified 12 sites across regions of low to high
terrestrial input and characterized spatial patterns in nutrients, fecal indicator bacteria, and
coral health; 2. tested the correlation between coral health and environmental metrics
using mixed modeling; and 3. prioritized reef areas that may benefit from corrective
action. Nutrient concentrations and fecal indicator bacteria abundance were highly variable across the study region, but were elevated in shoreline areas and declined reefward,
confirming the presence of land-based inputs. Coral health was also highly spatially
variable with the most prevalent conditions being growth anomalies and algal overgrowth,
each affecting 20% of colonies. Nutrient concentration was the strongest environmental
predictor of coral health, with a higher prevalence and severity of growth anomalies in
regions with elevated nitrate + nitrate concentrations. Our study highlights that nutrients
that can be associated with sewage or other sources are linked with impaired coral health,
and that coral health should be integrated into management plans as a tool for identifying
impaired reefs and understanding how watershed inputs affect reef health.

CHANGES IN THE INTENSITY OF DAMSELFISH ALGAL GARDENING IN BOCAS
DEL TORO, PANAMA OVER 7000 YEARS (Abstract ID: 29927 | Poster ID: 3)
Damselfish (Pomacentridae) often engage in a mutualistic behavior of plant-herbivore
gardening with filamentous algae. Fish deliberately damage patches of coral, permitting
space for the colonization of algae, which they then “farm”. In response to the bites of
damselfish, the staghorn coral,Acropora cervicornis, produces distinct protuberances,
or “chimneys”. These chimneys preserve well in fossil corals enabling a quantitative
Using modern and 7000 year old corals from Bocas del Toro, Panama, we found that the
occurrence of chimneys on coral branches is twice as frequent today as it was 7 ka, and
that the maximum density of chimneys in modern reefs is 10 times greater than it was 7
ka. These data indicate that a significant shift has taken place in the interaction between
damselfish and staghorn coral over the last 7 ka. Possible causes include: (1) A change in
the relationship between fish, coral, and algae, (2) More damselfish per coral caused by
cervicornis resulting in an apparent increase in chimney density. Further work is needed
to quantify natural variation in chimney density, understand the process of chimney
formation, and expand the fossil sampling.


SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL PATTERNS IN BIODIVERSITY: A LOOK AT CRYPTIC
CORAL REEF COMMUNITIES ACROSS THE HAWAIIAN ARCHIPELAGO (Abstract
ID: 29330)


Ecosystem function and resilience are fundamentally connected to patterns in community composition. The goals of this study were to document spatial and temporal patterns in reef biodiversity, to identify correlations between community composition and
environmental variables, and to investigate trends in species co-occurrences. This work
focused on communities of semi-cryptic fishes and invertebrates closely-associated with
across 44 sites in the Hawaiian archipelago. Preliminary analyses suggest lower biodiversity within the highly protected Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument
than around the densely populated island of O’ahu. Across all sites, characteristics of the
composition. Species co-occurrence analyses identified far more positive than negative
had only negative species associations. To quantify temporal variability, communities
was lower species turnover within communities over time than between communities over space. The largest temporal shifts occurred within colonies that had recently
bleached or were becoming covered with algae. Our results suggest that biodiversity in
Hawaiian archipelago, host coral quality, and species interactions.

COMPARING CHEMISTRY AND CENSUS-BASED ESTIMATES OF NET ECOSYSTEM CALCIFICATION ON A RIM REEF IN BERMUDA (Abstract ID: 29793)
Coral reef net ecosystem calcification (NEC) has decreased for many Caribbean reefs
over recent decades primarily due to a combination of declining coral cover and changing coral reef community composition. Chemistry-based approaches to calculate NEC
utilize the drawdown of seawater total alkalinity (TA) between the reef environment and
to estimate NEC occurring over annual timescales. Here, we calculated NEC for Hog
Reef in Bermuda using the chemistry and census-based NEC procedures to compare
the mass-balance generated by the two methods. NEC was calculated via the chemistrybased approach using reef TA data from a carbonate chemistry monitoring project and
offshore TA data collected by the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series Study. To calculate
NEC with the census-based approach, we used benthic surveys of line transects
conducted at Hog Reef coupled with literature reported mean annual coral growth rates
aggregated by the ReefBudget project, in-situ growth rates of Porites astreoides and Diploria
labyrinthiformis during the time of the study, carbonate sediment dissolution rates from
benthic chamber experiments, and photographic measurements of reef rugosity. Our
initial findings indicate the annual mean NEC calculated by the two methods agrees
within the range of uncertainties and highlights the high temporal variability of reef NEC
in response to changing environmental conditions.

MAPK SIGNALING IN CORAL STRESS RESPONSE (Abstract ID: 27820)
Coral reefs are of major ecological and socio-economic interests. They are exposed to
a variety of anthropogenic stresses such as ocean acidification and global warming, in
addition to natural stresses such as excessive solar irradiance and UV radiations. In the
context of climate change, great efforts are made to try to predict and prevent coral reef
degradation in response to stresses. Yet, very little is known about the signaling pathways
involved in the immediate stress response of these organisms. We identified c-Jun
N-terminal Kinase pathway (JNK) as being responsive to thermal and UV stresses. In
particular, JNK is activated when corals are exposed to high temperature (30 °C) with or
without UV radiations. Using a specific inhibitor, we showed that JNK is required for corals to down-regulate temperature and UV-induced reactive oxygen species production.
A comparable phenomenon was observed in human fibroblasts exposed to the same
stresses. Together, our results show that an ancestral stress response pathway involving
JNK is conserved from corals to mammals to protect cells from adverse events induced
by temperature and UV stresses.

70

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



PREDATION ON CROWN-OF-THORNS STARFISH LARVAE BY DAMSELFISHES
(Abstract ID: 27890)

TEMPORAL PATTERNS OF ENDEMISM AND PROVINCIALITY IN TROPICAL
REEF FISHES (Abstract ID: 29433)

Examining the functional response of predators provides insight into the role of predation
in structuring prey populations and ecological communities. We explored feeding behaviour and functional response of planktivorous damselfishes when offered captive reared
larvae of crown-of-thorns starfish, Acanthaster spp. with the aim of determining whether
these predators could play a role in moderating outbreaks of Acanthaster spp. With 11
species of planktivorous damselfish, we tested: the relationship between predator size
and predation rate, both within and among fish species; consumption rates on larvae of
Acanthaster spp. vs. larvae of a common, co-occurring asteroid Linckia laevigata; maximal
planktivorous fishes to increasing densities of Acanthaster spp. This data revealed that a
wide range of planktivorous fishes prey upon larvae of Acanthaster spp. Consumption rate
of Acanthaster spp. larvae by damselfishes was independent of predator size, however
there was a significant negative relationship between predator size and consumption rate
polyacanthus and Amblyglyphidodon curacao, consumed larval Acanthaster spp. at a
of Acanthaster spp., however abnormally high larval influx may swamp these predators,
potentially contributing to the characteristic population fluctuations of Acanthaster spp.

There is a general consensus that a large marine biodiversity hotspot straddles the
Indian and Pacific Oceans. Centered on the Indo-Australian Archipelago, this biodiversity
hotspot forms a steep gradient in species richness from this center to the periphery. This
gradient is characterized by over 5000 species of reef fish. Yet the origins of this pattern and how it is maintained across two-thirds of the world’s oceans remains unclear.
Traditional ‘hotspot’ assessments based on endemism have had little success, with areas
of species richness decoupled from centers of endemism. While there is a gradient in
species richness across the Indo-Pacific, provincial schemes have been identified based
on numerous delineating criteria. But, so far these delineations have not accounted for
the phylogenetic and biogeographic history of taxa. Here, we present an overview of the
origin of endemism in reef fishes, and combine ancestral biogeographic estimation and
phylogenetic dissimilarity clustering methods to explore past and present provinciality.
While phylogenetic sampling of endemism is low, most ecoregions contain both old
and young endemic species. Phylogenetic dissimilarity clustering of extant assemblages
identifies a large Indo-West Pacific cluster, but also clusters distant Pacific island together
based on peripherally isolated, but phylogenetically close lineages. Through time, clustering of estimated ranges reveals the dynamic nature of reef assemblages with provincial
changes reflecting large scale tectonic rearrangement of the tropical belt.



THE ROLE OF REEF COMMUNITY COMPOSITION AND PARROTFISH PROTECTION IN PHASE SHIFT REVERSAL (Abstract ID: 30034)

INVESTIGATING MULTIPLE CORAL REEF STRESSORS ON A SHOE-STRING
(Abstract ID: 29324)

Protecting parrotfish species from fishing is a central conservation strategy designed to
reverse shifts in reef community structure from coral to algal dominance. However, the
response of reef communities might not be that simple. Here we evaluate the response
of parrotfish populations and benthic communities to protection from marine protected
areas and a national ban on herbivorous fish harvesting. From 2009 to 2013, we annually
surveyed 16 reefs in Belize, including 8 MPA sites (Fully Protected or General Use),
and 8 unprotected control sites. At the reefs surveyed, macroalgal communities were
dominated by Lobophora sp., Dictyota sp. and Halimeda sp. and parrotfish communities
were dominated by Sparisoma viride and Sparisoma aurofrenatum. Parrotfish biomass
increased in protected zones over the five-year study period; however, recovery in Belize
no relationship between mean parrotfish biomass and mean macroalagal cover across
all sites and year. Additionally, mean total macroalgal cover remained above 40% in all
years suggesting that the amount of macroalgae on Belizean reefs may simply be greater
than the consumption capacity of herbivorous fishes. We suggest that protection of parrotfish may not be a panacea and community composition is an important consideration
for the success of phase shift reversal.

The decline of reef health and resilience has been recorded in many locations, but the
causes of this decline are less clear. The ecologically complex and dynamic nature of
coral reefs means that identifying the factors contributing to coral decline is difficult, and
requires measuring numerous indicators. In this study, indicators of reef resilience to
coral bleaching were collected on 40 different sites in Kenya, Mozambique, Maldives and
Sumatra. All parameters used in this study were collected either during a single visit to
the reef or from freely available online data sources. The resilience of these reefs in terms
of recovery potential and resistance to bleaching were compared with five explanatory
factors, intended to encompass a range of human stressors, past climatic stress and
natural variation in resilience: local human population density, distance to the mainland,
past acute thermal stress, protected status and reef zone. Local population, distance to
the mainland and zone were significantly correlated with reef resilience. Reefs with the
highest recovery potential were associated with low population densities, and offshore
locations. Sites with the highest resistance were in lagoons and nearer to the mainland.
This study demonstrates how multiple stressors on coral reefs can be investigated and
analysed using minimal resources. The findings of this study point towards conservation actions, including the prioritisation of protecting Enggano, Sumatra, as an MPA, and
boosting resilience in Vamizi, Mozambique, through increasing herbivore biomass.


CONNECTIVITY OF THE PULLEY RIDGE - SOUTH FLORIDA CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEM: PROCESSES TO DECISION-SUPPORT RESOURCES (Abstract ID: 29838)

SOCIAL FRAGMENTATION INHIBITS LOCAL MANAGEMENT IN A DOMINICAN
FISHERY (Abstract ID: 28831 | Poster ID: 597)

The coral reef ecosystem of the southeast United States is a complex system of
interconnected, deep and shallow reefs stretching along the western, southern and southeastern coasts of Florida. Given its economic and ecological value, there is a strong need
to develop effective management options that encompass the entire ecosystem and its
complex interactions. The goal of the Pulley Ridge research program is to provide the
key scientific information needed to rigorously address this management challenge with
a specific focus on the mesophotic reefs located on Pulley Ridge. We adopt an interdisciplinary approach (physical oceanography, bio-physical modeling, population genetics,
population dynamics of key species) and yield a quantitative understanding of the scale
and extent of connectivity. Building on this information we then incorporate studies on
refine management options and help establish priorities. Through consultation with state,
federal and private stakeholders, we are integrating our findings into a Decision Support
Resource to aggregate findings and archive data.

Like many artisanal fishing communities around the globe, the village of Buen Hombre
in the Dominican Republic is struggling to sustainably manage its coral reef fishery. An
effective local management regime reported in the community in the 1980s and 90s has
since deteriorated, and the present-day marine ecosystem indicates heavy overfishing. We integrate current and historical data to assess social changes within the Buen
Hombre fishery and their implications for current fishing practices. Our findings indicate
that an increase in social divisions among the Buen Hombre fishers poses a significant
barrier to management in the community today. We conduct social network analyses
to measure unity among the Buen Hombre fishers and identify factors contributing
to social fragmentation. These analyses reveal strong social divides among the Buen
Hombre fishers and indicate that choice of fishing gear and membership to the Buen
Hombre Fishermen’s Association are key drivers of these social factions. Our analyses
also enable us to identify key individuals within the community that have high degrees
of social connections within or between different social subgroups. Reestablishing local
management of the Buen Hombre fishery will require communication and cooperation
among the entire fisher population. Social network analyses provide invaluable insight for
bridging social factions and facilitating effective management not only in Buen Hombre
but in artisanal coral reef fisheries around the world.
71

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


The Diversity of the Indo Pacific Network (DIPnet) seeks to promote open data exchange
and collaboration among researchers working in the Indo-Pacific region; to this end, we
have assembled the most extensive database of georeferenced mitochondrial DNA sequences for any biogeographic region comprising over 30,000 individual haplotypes from
over 200 coral reef associated species sampled at over 1,500 locations. Initial analysis of
the database reveals a significant correlation between coverage-corrected haplotypic richness and species richness. Moreover, bioregionalizations based on coral community composition explain genetic structure in a majority of tested species better than those based
on fish. Both results suggest common mechanisms for structuring marine biodiversity at
the molecular and species level. We will discuss these preliminary results and promote
DIPnet as a vehicle for open science and international collaboration.

PROJECT CORAL – DEVELOPING PROTOCOLS FOR PREDICTABLE BROADCAST CORAL SPAWNING IN CAPTIVITY (Abstract ID: 28671)
While brooding coral species commonly release planula in aquaria, broadcast spawning
events in captivity are rare and highly unpredictable. Spawning correlates strongly with a
number of environmental signals, (seasonal temperature, lunar and diel cycles) however
few robust experimental studies have examined the role of these putative cues in triggering
spawning. Project Coral, an innovative coral sexual reproductive research project, run
Singapore and SECORE International aims to better understand the drivers of coral
reproduction and to develop protocols to facilitate predictable broadcast spawning events
in captivity. In March 2015 14 large Acropora hyacinthus fragments were transported from a
predicted annual mass spawning event to initially to see if spawning timing would remain
in synchrony with the remnant parent colonies from which the fragments were removed.
In April 11 of the 14 corals spawned in the tank at approximately the same time as corals
remaining on the reef demonstrating that natural rhythms had been maintained. The long
term aim is to see if we can maintain spawning rhythms over longer periods and ultimately
manipulate environmental signals to investigate their role in triggering spawning.

PARTNERSHIP FOR SUCCESS IN A CHANGING SEASCAPE: COMBINING INDIGENOUS
PRACTICES AND WESTERN SCIENCE FOR SUSTAINABLE REEF MANAGEMENT IN
THE YAP OUTER ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29987)

The Yap outer islands (Federated States of Micronesia) encompass more than 250,000
Km2 of the tropical western Pacific. Outer Islanders depend on their coral reefs for food
and other environmental services, but cultural and ecological change are compromising the
reef ecosystems. A lack of scientific knowledge from the region coupled with a decline in
traditional management knowledge and frameworks have left communities with a lack of
knowledge to effectively manage their reef systems in the face of rapidly changing ecological and social systems. In recognition of this, communities on Ulithi Atoll - the fourth largest
atoll in the world, are working with a team of scientists to combine western science with
traditional practices to address ecological and resource issues while strengthening communities and governance. It is a unique partnership to identify changes in resource extraction
and management, and the impacts of those changes on the reef system–leading to depleted
resources and in some cases poor reef health. Timely implementation of management has
seen rapid results, and may well be key to reef recovery after the recent devastating typhoon
Maysak. This successful model has inspired other outer island communities to model Ulithi,
and has great potential to enhance adaptive management throughout the region. We will
present findings from the science team, the fisheries data team (Ulithi science team), and
how both western and indigenous teams are informing each other.


PREHISTORICAL AND HISTORICAL DETERIORATION OF CARIBBEAN REEF
ECOSYSTEMS LINKED TO DECLINES IN REEF ACCRETION, HERBIVORY, AND
WATER QUALITY (Abstract ID: 30050)
Caribbean reefs have declined dramatically over the past decades, suffering mass mortality events that have transformed them from coral- to algae-dominated habitats. Debate
is ongoing about the initial timing and dominant drivers of recent change due to lack of
baseline data. To help resolve the underlying mechanisms of recent and widespread reef
declines, we produced a high-resolution 3,000 year record of reef ecosystem state from
the analysis of fish, coral, urchin, bivalve, and benthic foraminifera subfossils within reef
matrix cores from Caribbean Panama. This whole-ecosystem approach allowed us to
determine ecological linkages among different faunal groups and to infer environmental
causes and consequences of observed community change. At each site, declines in reef
accretion rates and fish and coral abundance were initiated in the prehistorical or historical period, characterized by remarkably consistent patterns of change in fish, urchin, and
bivalve composition. Historical ecosystem shifts were accompanied by a decline in water
quality, implicating local human activities. Accretion rates were tightly coupled with parrotfish and urchin abundances throughout the cores. Our results suggest close integration
of multiple components of the reef community, suggesting feedbacks between corals
and herbivores in particular are making it difficult to reverse reef phase shifts.


DECIPHERING MULTIPLE CONTROLS ON CARBONATE CHEMISTRY IN
COASTAL REEF SYSTEMS: AN EXAMPLE FROM A BACK REEF LAGOON WITH
GROUNDWATER DISCHARGE (Abstract ID: 28908 | Poster ID: 95)
Understanding dynamic reef ecosystem processes is a critical step in determining he
impacts of ocean acidification on coral reef communities. The Puerto Morelos coast
of Quintana Roo, Mexico presents a unique opportunity to explore natural fluctuations
in carbonate system parameters along the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef. Specifically,
diurnal and seasonal patterns lead to natural fluctuations in community reef metabolism
(respiration, photosynthesis, and calcification) that in this system are further complicated
by the addition of brackish groundwater discharge into the back reef lagoon. We present
data of from two instruments deployed over a period of six months to explore the
relationships between physical and biological processes impacting carbonate chemistry
on dynamic reef systems influenced by groundwater discharge.




The tropical Indian and Pacific oceans form the world’s largest and most speciose marine
biogeographic region: the Indo-Pacific. Due to its size and political complexity, the IndoPacific is rarely studied as a whole, yet comprehensive studies of the region promise to
teach us much about marine biogeography. Molecular methods can provide substantial
insights into the processes that create and maintain biodiversity in the region. Although
many research groups have independently amassed considerable genetic data much can
be learned from capitalizing upon these efforts in a larger, unified, multispecies context.

CARICOMP: TWENTY YEARS DESCRIBING PATTERNS AND TRAJECTORIES OF
CARIBBEAN CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28156)

72

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Long-term monitoring programs are valuable to describe the natural dynamic of coral
reef ecosystems in space and time. The Caribbean Coastal Marine Productivity program
(CARICOMP) represents the largest and longest cooperative effort to monitor synoptically coral reefs in the Wider Caribbean. Here we present a summary of trajectories of
42 reef sites spread out across the region from 1992 to 2007. The analysis also includes
few countries where the program is still active. Results indicate that in 1993, mean coral
cover in the region was 21 ± 6 % (CI 95%). Only 11 sites (26%) had mean live coral cover
above the regional average and remained in this way for the study period. In addition, ten
sites (24%) were within the confidence interval of average live coral cover and kept this
condition until 2007. More than 50% of the sites lost between 2 to 30% of their live coral
cover from 1992 to 2007, with the largest coral mortality recorded at Morrocoy National
Park (Venezuela) and Pinnacle reef (Cayman Islands). We found a weak but significant
negative correlation (r = -0.49, r2 = 0.19, p< 0.05) between the mean live coral cover and
mean macroalgae cover at all sites between 1993 and 2007. These results further indicate
that lost of coral cover was not always followed by an increase of macroalgae. Overall,
our results support that coral cover in the monitored Caribbean reefs had been declining
over the past decades; however, degree of community structure change varied strongly
across the 42 reef sites and relatively few showed a clear algal phase shift.

LINKING PHASE SHIFTS TO ENVIRONMENTAL DIFFERENCES USING CORAL
REEFS IN MARGINAL CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 29601)
Phase shift, the change in dominance from corals to non-reef building organisms, is a
dramatic consequence of coral reef degradation. Climate changes has been proposed
to increase the frequency of phase shifts, leading to further loss of their ecosystem
services. Higher resistance to climate changes has been theorized for reefs that formed in
regions at the limit of tolerable environmental conditions (marginal reefs). Most previous
phase shift assessments have been focused on non-marginal reefs, however, which could
lead to potential bias in forecasts of the possible reef response to these environmental
changes. Using datamining and meta-analysis, we examined the extensive marginal
reef complex in the Southwest Atlantic to identify types of phase shift, the extent of
their presence and also possible associations with natural and anthropogenic influences
through statistical analysis. We used an index of phase shift through principal component
analysis to define phase shift types and magnitudes for those previously studied reefs.
Our results point two phase shift, one, more restrict, to dominance of zoanthid and
another to dominance of macroalgae. Macroalgae phase shift is correlated with distance
of coast and human density while zoanthid phase shift was found only on dredging influence areas. On Southwest Atlantic coral reefs, the sum of the proportion of reefs defined
as exhibiting phase shifts was higher than for Caribbean reefs, suggesting that marginal
reef are more sensitive to human impact and climate changes than non-marginal reef
systems.


HIGH THROUGHPUT MICROSATELLITE GENOTYPING CONTRADICTS THAT
ACROPORA HYACINTHUS WAS EXTIRPATED ON PALAU AND RECOLONIZED
The catastrophic loss of corals, particularly the Acropora spp., around the island of Palau
following the 1998 El Niño had profound ecological and social impacts. The result of
which included the formation of a network of marine protected areas (MPAs) with the
goal of ensuring reef recovery and resilience to any such future events. MPA networks
rely on population connectivity to persist, but measuring connectivity to support the
design of MPA networks remains challenging because it is nearly impossible to track pelagic larval dispersal directly. A detailed oceanographic model, developed to evaluate the
current MPA network design, predicts larval dispersal between Palau and Yap and led
to the conclusion that recovery of Acropora spp. on Palau likely resulted from a pulse of
larval recruitment from Yap. This result has been used to argue for cooperative MPA networks spanning Palau and Yap. We used high throughput microsatellite genotyping of the
coral Acropora hyacinthus and show that recovery in Palau did not come from a pulse of
recruits from Yap. Instead, we find as much differentiation within Palau as between Palau
and Yap, with significant population genetic structure among all of the 25 sites sampled
around Palau. These results indicate that recovery most likely originated, at least in large
part, from sites within Palau, and suggest high rates of localized self-recruitment. In light
of these results there seems to be little effective dispersal among sites around Palau,
which argues for increasing the number and size of MPAs within Palau.


GENDER-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE GROWTH CHARACTERISTICS IN
SKELETONS OF THE REEF-BUILDING CORAL DICHOCOENIA STOKESI IN THE
Mean annual growth characteristics (bulk density, skeletal extension rate and calcification rate) were determined using annual density growth bands found along slabs of skeletons of three females, and two males form the reef building coral Dichocoenia stokesi,
collected at 4 m depth at Puerto Morelos Reef, Mexican Caribbean. No significant
difference was observed for mean annual density between females and males (t-test for
independent samples, p > 0.05). Annual skeletal extension and annual calcification rates
showed a significant difference between both genders (t-test for independent samples,
p < 0.0001). Despite these differences, for the time span represented by these slabs
(1993-2013), calcification rate showed a negative relationship with increasing sea surface
temperature (SST), decreasing around 0.19 g cm-2 yr-1 for each 1 oC increase in SST
for both females and males. The slopes were not significantly different (F-test, p > 0.05)
although the intercepts were significantly different (F-test, p < 0.0005). The intercepts
indicated calcification would cease in females at 28.9 and at 29.9 oC in males. Similar to
energetic costs for reproduction between females and males, and must be taken into account when skeletons of gonochoric corals are used for environmental reconstructions.


“THIS IS WHO WE ARE”: NATIONAL CAMPAIGN COMPETITION IN THE CARIBBEAN INCREASES COMMUNITY AWARENESS OF MARINE CONSERVATION
AND MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 28977 | Poster ID: 608)


In 2015, six Eastern Caribbean islands competed to implement the most effective public
awareness campaign that fosters pride in ocean resources and promotes environmental
stewardship. The campaigns were an innovative strategy to address evidence of low
support for marine managed areas (MMAs) among fishers and coastal communities. The
initiative is a key component of the Climate-Resilient Eastern Caribbean Marine Managed Areas Network (ECMMAN). ECMMAN’s goal is to build a network of effective
MMAs in the region, which will protect critical ecosystems like coral reefs, and sustain
healthy fisheries. Preliminary assessments in 2014 indicated more effectively managed
MMAs will require increased public awareness to improve community acceptance and
compliance. A campaign competition was designed to motivate community engagement, while maximizing regional impact through a shared campaign theme, “This is Who
We Are.” With regional training on campaign methodology and on-going support, marine resource representatives developed and implemented culturally relevant campaign
strategies that targeted specific audiences, behaviors and outcomes. Campaign outputs
include school presentations with mascots, beach clean-ups, fishing tournaments, music
videos, radio shows and more. The campaign competition is a unique and successful
model that can be replicated and modified both locally and internationally.

ECONOMICS, CONSUMER DEMAND, AND LOCAL ENVIRONMENTS INTERACTIVELY DRIVE CORAL-REEF FISHERIES EXPORTS ACROSS MICRONESIA
(Abstract ID: 28425)
Coral-reef fisheries have historically played a central role in island societies, yet advances
in fishing technology and growing commercialization are creating new and challenging
fisheries paradigms. In Chuuk, Federated States of Micronesia, the combination of high
unemployment, extensive coral reef systems, and proximity to the large commercial
market on Guam has led to the development of the largest commercial reef fishery in
the region. Export datasets revealed a fishery driven by foreign demand, with exports
accounting for half of commercial landings over the last 12 years. Fishing effort matched
Chuuk-Guam connecting flights, and exports became increasingly coupled with demand
peaks associated with monthly disbursements of Guam’s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Large increase in SNAP issuance in the late 2000’s corresponded
with a “boom” of coral-reef fish exports, followed by a gradual decrease since 2010 that
was associated with diminishing profits from rising costs and stagnating retail prices.
While Chuuk stocks remain in better condition than other Micronesian jurisdictions,
73

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

been captured. The model can be expanded in a modular fashion to test hypotheses
regarding how photoinhibition, host carbon-concentrating mechanisms, symbiont selfshading, nitrogen-recycling, or other phenomena influence symbiosis stability and coral
