performance under various conditions. Additional symbiont types may be modeled to
test conditions under which symbiont shuffling occurs, and its effects on coral performance. DEB models may be used to generate wide-ranging hypotheses and predictions
regarding coral-Symbiodinium symbioses, and may ultimately provide a mechanistic
understanding of coral responses to environmental change.

strong gradients were found between catch success and proximity to human populations.
Similarly, large-bodied species preferentially targeted for exports (but with little local
demand) were most targeted and impacted by fishing pressure. Our findings suggest the
need to transcend disciplinary and geo-political boundaries when managing small-scale
fisheries in increasingly globalized markets.


ID: 28662 | Poster ID: 15)
The symbiotic relationship between cnidarians and dinoflagellates forms the basis of
coral reef ecosystems. Despite the ecological importance of this symbiosis, we know
relatively little about the underlying cellular and molecular mechanism. The close relative of corals, the sea anemone Aiptasia, has been used widely as a model organism in
the study of the cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis. Like reef-building corals, Aiptasia
establishes a stable symbiotic relationship with photosynthetic dinoflagellates of the
genus Symbiodinium. However, in contrast to corals, Aiptasia can be maintained with
or without symbionts and is easily kept and manipulated in common molecular biology labs. This makes it an ideal system to study the interaction of the partners in this
symbiosis. To date, several publications have provided transcriptomic information for
this model organism, but all the research was conducted on whole organism level. In this
study, we applied laser microdissection to isolate endodermal and ectodermal cells from
both symbiotic and aposymbiotic Aiptasia. We developed a protocol to extract RNA
from this minute amount of cells and are in the process of generating tissue-specific
transcriptomes and differential gene expression analyses for these four cells layers. This
is the first study on cell type-specific transcriptome level in Aiptasia and the approaches
we developed are expected to improve our understanding of the molecular and cellular
basis of the cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis.

EMPIRICAL ASSESSMENT OF CLIMATE-INDUCED RANGE SHIFT IN AN ENDEMIC AND EXPLOITED REEF FISH (Abstract ID: 28978)

HETERARCHIES: CONNECTING HIERARCHIES AND NETWORKS FOR MARINE
PROTECTED AREAS (Abstract ID: 27850 | Poster ID: 593)

Climate change is causing range shifts of marine species, calling for adaptive management of fisheries resources and conservation of marine biodiversity. The waters off
Western Australia (WA) are a model system to study range shifts. They present consistent
environmental clines and are also a hotspot for endemism and ocean warming. Recently
this region experienced rapid warming during the 2011 marine heat wave. We assessed
demographic responses to rapid warming of baldchin groper Choerodon rubescens, a
wrasse endemic in WA and a fisheries target, which occurs from tropical to temperate
reefs. Range-wide data on abundance, recruitment, size structure, ecology and genetic
connectivity are presented. Subsequent to the 2011 heat wave, the abundance distribution of recruits showed a displacement to the south when compared to that of adults.
We found high recruitment at the temperate edge and no recruitment at the tropical
edge. Recruits were consistently associated with habitats at the margin between reef and
sand, indicating availability of this habitat type is likely to limit expansion at the cooler
edge. Unique use of genomics traced the origin of this southern recruitment pulse to
central populations 400 km upstream that experience different environmental conditions. Juveniles at the southern end are feeding on common prey and have survived over
five winters. Whether they grow to maturity and reproduce is yet to be determined but
WA marine endemics and may serve as a model species for managing this vulnerable
group in a changing climate.

Social-ecological systems research currently suffers from a disconnect between hierarchical (top-down or bottom-up) and network (peer to peer) analyses. The concept of the
heterarchy unifies these perspectives in a single framework. I briefly review the history
and application of ‘heterarchy’ in neuroscience, ecology, archaeology, multi-agent control
systems, business and organizational studies, and politics. Recognising complex system
architecture as a continuum along vertical and lateral axes (‘decentralised vs. hierarchical’
and ‘individual vs. networked’) suggests four basic types of heterarchy: egalitarian, polycentric, pyramidal, and individualistic. Each has different implications for system functioning and resilience, and systems may shift predictably and abruptly between architectures.
I illustrate the value of this perspective using examples of institutional change in marine
governance and differences in the ecological connectivity between reef ecosystems.
Heterarchies suggest new ways of contextualising and generalising from case studies and
new methods for analysing complex structure-function relationships.



LIONFISH FEEDING HABITS AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR REEF BENTHIC
COVER (Abstract ID: 30077)


The lionfish invasion has become an issue of critical concern in the Western Atlantic.
There is substantial research demonstrating the negative effects of the invaders on native
reef fish. Surprisingly, little is known about the long-term impacts of invasive lionfish
on fish assemblages and the cascading effects on reef benthic cover. We monitored
lionfish, their prey, and benthic composition on 16 patch reefs over a five-year period in
South Eleuthera, The Bahamas. On half of the patches, lionfish were removed quarterly.
Reef ecosystems are notoriously complex. Thus, to isolate if the alteration in the fish
lionfish predation, lionfish feeding habits were investigated in a lab setting. We identified
which prey species lionfish preferred by comparing the gut contents of wild caught
lionfish to available prey on the reef. This information was used to design experimental
choice trials using species frequently found in lionfish stomachs and species present
on the reefs yet avoided by lionfish. We also experimentally examined the role of prey
abundance on lionfish feeding choice. Collectively, established monitoring programs and
improved understanding of lionfish feeding behaviour are fundamental to understanding
and predicting the long-term impacts of lionfish and can be used to inform conservation
and mitigation strategies throughout the region.

SIMPLE DYNAMIC ENERGY BUDGET MODELS FOR CORAL-ALGAL SYMBIOSIS
(Abstract ID: 29000)
Coral-algal symbioses are functional across a range of environmental conditions, yet
show significant variation in architecture, mechanics, and performance as conditions
change. A mechanistic understanding of dynamic coral-Symbiodinium interactions is
necessary to understand and predict coral responses to environmental change. Dynamic
Energy Budget (DEB) theory offers a framework to integrate effects of multiple abiotic
factors on holobiont performance by tracking the flow of energy and mass through time
within a syntrophic symbiosis. Here, we develop a simple DEB model describing the
acquisition and exchange of carbon and nitrogen resources by both symbiotic partners
based on the principle of sharing the surplus. The model qualitatively reproduces
patterns in Symbiodiniumbiomass ratios and coral growth rates observed over a range
of light, nutrient, and prey availability levels, suggesting the major mechanisms have

74

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


biogeochemical function of reef ecosystems. A simple model demonstrated that reefs
with slopes greatly different from 0.95 have a dramatic increase in the diel variability of
seawater pH, which is exacerbated by ocean acidification. Monitoring the pulse of coral
reefs via TA and DIC measurements through time and space could help to better inform
conservation and management efforts.

PRINCIPLES FOR IMPROVING KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE AMONG SCIENTISTS
AND DECISION-MAKERS TO FACILITATE THE RESILIENCE-BASED MANAGEMENT OF CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 29107)
The resilience-based management of coral reef ecosystems requires knowledge
exchange between scientists and decision-makers, however, the uptake and integration of science into decision-making processes remains a significant challenge. Rather,
evidence suggests that decision-makers rely on individual experience or other secondary
sources of knowledge in isolation from scientific evidence when formulating decisions,
potentially compromising the effectiveness of their decisions. Using both quantitative
and qualitative research approaches, we survey coral reef scientists and decision-makers
from around Australia to identify, and develop strategies to overcome, the barriers
prohibiting knowledge exchange among the two groups. We find that barriers include
cultural differences between scientists and decision-makers, the inaccessibility of science
to decision-makers, and institutional barriers that limit the extent to which coral reef
scientists and decision-makers can prioritise knowledge exchange activities. We also
identify guiding principles that should be implemented as part of any applied coral reef
research program including: (i) stakeholder mapping prior to the commencement of
research programs to identify all stakeholders, (ii) research questions to be co-developed
by all stakeholders, (iii) implementation of participatory research approaches, (iv) use
of a knowledge broker, and (v) tailored knowledge management systems. Finally, we
articulate the individual, institutional and financial capacities that must be developed to
underpin knowledge exchange strategies.

LAYER BY LAYER – TRANSCRIPTOMIC AND PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF HEATSTRESSED STRAINS OF AIPTASIA PALLIDA (Abstract ID: 29364)
Corals and their endosymbionts Symbiodinium, are key building blocks of the coral reef
ecosystem. However, environmental stress imposed by increasing temperatures lead to
the breakdown of symbiosis, known as bleaching. The capacity of corals to maintain
their symbionts through acclimatization is crucial for coral reef resilience. Comparative
heat-stress studies of coral species capable of inhabiting wide environmental gradients,
have shown different gene expression patterns possibly linked to bleaching resistance in
individuals from warmer regions. Transcriptomics is used as a proxy for gene activity and
associated protein content. However, with growing knowledge of post-transcriptional
study showed that the increased expression of some genes was not reciprocated at
protein level. This study explores heat-stress associated changes in transcriptome and
proteome layers of the cnidarian model organism Aiptasia from three distinct geographical locations: Red Sea, Florida and Hawaii. Also, the role of the symbiont in thermal stress
response was investigated by comparing the same Florida strain infected with Symbiodinium from different clades. Analysis of both layers allows for a better understanding as to
what extent transcript levels are an accurate reflection of protein levels. This combination
increases our understanding on which genes and associated proteins play crucial roles in
acclimatization and further, elucidate factors driving variations in coral thermal tolerance.



PUSH-CORE SAMPLING IN MICRONESIA: USING PALEOECOLOGICAL DATA TO
RECONSTRUCT GUAM’S CORAL REEF COMMUNITY (Abstract ID: 28387 | Poster
ID: 14)

INVESTIGATING SOCIAL DRIVERS OF FISHING AND MARKET INFLUENCES
ON INCREASINGLY EXPLOITED SMALL-SCALE CORAL REEF FISHERIES
(Abstract ID: 29061)

Since the early 1970’s, the coral reefs of Guam have been declining with a measurable
reduction in live coral cover, a trend documented elsewhere and attributed to a range
of anthropogenic stressors. To determine both the nature and extent of decline, we
since been inundated with water and marine sediment due to rising sea levels) from
two sites on the western side of the Guam. The cores ranged from 70 – 125 cm and the
oldest was carbon dated back to approximately 500 years. The cores were separated
into 5 cm sections processed using 2000, 4000, and 8000 µm sieves to separate out coral
fragments. The coral fragments were identified to family to create a long-term record
of Guam’s near shore reef communities and to provide historical context for evaluating
both the rate and magnitude of change. We also discuss key assumption in our novel
application of push-coring and its potential for future studies.

Many coastal communities in the Pacific are part of complex social-ecological systems
that have relied on coral reefs for centuries. Recent pressures including changing climates
and economies are threatening the resilience of these systems. This study seeks to
better understand drivers of social-ecological resilience and how they are linked through
asking: 1) What are the social drivers of fishing effort? and 2) How do markets influence
Data were gathered in 20 Fijian villages using a mixed methods approach including
household and fisher interviews, catch logs, and ecological surveys. Structural equation
modeling was used to identify the significant drivers of fishing effort and examine links
between drivers. While environmental factors are expected to play a large role in driving
explain ~25% of the variation in household fishing effort. Between 50-75% of household
catches are used for subsistence, while the remainder is used for sharing and sale. Top
predators and larger fish are targeted for sale, often using spears, while a wide range of
species and sizes are used for household consumption. The results of this study stress
the need to consider the human dimension in coral reef fisheries management and call
attention to potential consequences of limited fisheries yields on social resilience.


UNDERSTANDING THE BIOGEOCHEMICAL FUNCTION OF THE WORLDS
CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 30004)
Coral reefs throughout the world are under increasing pressure from anthropogenic
perturbations which threaten to shift reefs from a state of net CaCO3 production to net
dissolution. Once a reef becomes net dissolving it can no longer maintain the growth of
CaCO3 structures critical for sustaining the diversity and abundance of life on coral reefs.
Therefore it is critical to monitor and predict how anthropogenic forcings will affect the
balance of net ecosystem calcification in reef ecosystems. Currently, most coral reef
monitoring projects rely on visual measurements of benthic composition and do not
measure seawater chemistry parameters such as total alkalinity (TA) and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC). Vector analysis of TA and DIC can be used to determine the relative
influence of organic (photosynthesis/respiration) versus inorganic (CaCO3production/
dissolution) processes occurring on a coral reef. Results from a mesocosm study demonstrate that benthic community composition is reflected in the TA-DIC slope of the
overlying seawater. An analysis of 23 coral reef locations around the globe showed that
there is a diverse range in TA-DIC slopes (0.24 to 1.36), indicating a large range in the

MARINE RESERVES LAG BEHIND WILDERNESS IN THE CONSERVATION OF
KEY FUNCTIONAL ROLES (Abstract ID: 29182 | Poster ID: 640)
Although marine reserves represent one of the most effective management responses to
human impacts, their capacity to sustain the same diversity of species and functional roles
75

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

The pattern of connectivity among populations can be described by the measurement
of a dispersal kernel. However, a complete empirical dispersal kernel has been lacking
for any marine species. We use genetic parentage analysis to quantify a dispersal kernel
for the reef fishElacatinus lori, demonstrating that dispersal declines exponentially with
distance. The spatial scale of dispersal is an order of magnitude less than previous
estimates—the median dispersal distance is just 1.7 km and no dispersal events exceed
16.4 km despite intensive sampling out to 30 km from source. Neither pelagic larval
duration nor direction is associated with the probability of successful dispersal. Given the
strong relationship between distance and dispersal, we show that distance-driven logistic
models have strong power to predict dispersal probabilities. Moreover, connectivity
matrices generated from these models are congruent with empirical estimates of spatial
genetic structure, suggesting that the pattern of dispersal we uncovered reflects longterm patterns of gene flow. These results challenge assumptions regarding the spatial
scale and presumed predictors of marine population connectivity. We conclude that if
marine reserve networks aim to connect whole communities of fishes and conserve
biodiversity broadly, then reserves that are close in space will accommodate species that
are short-distance dispersers.

and the same biomass of reef fishes as wilderness areas remains questionable, particularly
in regions with deep and long-lasting human footprints. . Here we show that fish functional
diversity and biomass of apex predators are significantly higher on coral reefs located at
more than 20 hours travel time from the main market compared to even the oldest (38 years
old), largest (17,500 ha) and most restrictive (no-entry) marine reserve in New Caledonia
(South-Western Pacific). We demonstrate that wilderness areas support unique ecological
values with no equivalency as one gets closer to humans, even in large and well-managed
marine reserves. Wilderness areas may therefore serve as benchmarks for management
effectiveness and act as the last refuges for the most vulnerable functional roles.

AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION IN CORAL REEF IMAGES CAPTURED BY
MULTIPLE CAMERAS OVER TIME (Abstract ID: 29244 | Poster ID: 551)
Towards the goal of automatically quantifying significant changes in shallow and wide
coral reef areas, we developed a change detection algorithm which can identify presence or absence of benthic objects in the same quadrat. The quadrats were imaged by
different cameras under varied capture perspective, illumination, and water condition.
Our change detection algorithm is novel because it uses shape detection and feature
extraction to process images of life forms with arbitrary shapes having little or no sharp
corners from which image registration can be performed. Previous techniques were not
as flexible to variations in capture settings and do not take into account real underwater
situations where drastic changes can happen such as those caused by typhoons, massive
bleaching, and groundings. The algorithm was developed and tested on a set of coral
reef images taken within a span of five years from a quadrat in Lian, Batangas, Philippines. Shape features were extracted from the reference images to isolate objects of interest. Local binary pattern (LBP) texture feature histograms were obtained from random
patches within the boundaries of these objects across all images in the set to determine
presence or absence of reef benthos. The texture vector angle matrices consistently
showed small angles when the object of interest is present in the images over time and
relatively large angles when the object is absent. Validation resulted to 81% accuracy for
presence and 97% for absence.


MANIPULATING PROKARYOTIC SYMBIONTS TO ENHANCE CORAL STRESS
TOLERANCE (Abstract ID: 27936 | Poster ID: 149)
Coral reefs are suffering massive declines due to anthropogenic and other environmental disturbances. While it is urgent to mitigate the effects of climate change, it is also
essential to explore ways of augmenting coral tolerance to stress. Here we investigate
whether this is achievable by manipulating prokaryotic symbionts. Corals are colonized
by a huge diversity of prokaryotes, which exert various beneficial functions, including
nutrient cycling and protection from pathogens, thereby directly influencing the health
of their host. Acropora tenuis larvae reared in UV-treated and filtered seawater were
exposed either to filtered seawater, or to microbiomes isolated from the mucus of coral
species known to be resistant or sensitive to heat stress. To assess the feasibility of
microbial community manipulations and stability of acquired microbiomes, prokaryotic
communities of coral larvae and recruits were regularly sampled for characterization
by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Samples were also collected to quantify the ratio of 16S
rRNA to 16S rRNA gene copy number, often used as an indicator of metabolic activity.
In addition, samples were fixed for analysis by fluorescence in situ hybridization in order
to localize prokaryote groups within coral tissues. In parallel, survival and growth of coral
recruits was monitored to evaluate how microbiomes influence coral fitness. The potential to enhance coral tolerance to stress via the manipulation of prokaryotic symbionts is
expected to provide promising approaches for coral reef restoration.


THE LINKS BETWEEN CORAL REEF FISH BODY SIZES, THEIR HOME RANGE
SIZES, AND STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY ON A CORAL REEF OF KOH PHANGAN, LOWER GULF OF THAILAND (Abstract ID: 28707)
Decreases in coral reef structural complexity result in the reduction of available shelter
to the functionally important fishes. This may strongly impact and restructure reef
associated fish communities and subvert functional integrity. Recent research suggests
that reduced structural complexity could result in a higher relative representation of
fishes with larger body sizes and larger home range sizes. The present study aims to link
body and home range sizes of herbivores and corallivores to structural complexity and
benthic cover of a small scale habitat. Observations were conducted from 16/03/2015
to 10/06/2015 in 30x5m belt transects on the reef crest of Mae Haad, a bay (~800m
length) of Koh Phangan in the Gulf of Thailand. Each belt transect was assessed for: fishes (species, abundance, size classes; visually assessed), structural complexity (rugosity of
vertical reef crest contour; chain-and-tape method), and benthic cover (three-dimensional structural elements; line-point-intercept method). The results confirm suggestions of
previous studies. Small scale coral reef habitats of low structural complexity (rugosity ~
1.4) show significantly higher relative representation of fishes with larger home range and
body sizes. Corallivory decreases with declining structural complexity while herbivory
increases. Fish-habitat interactions with a specific site weaken as structural complexity
reduces. These findings have the potential to develop spatial and species-specific management tools that assist in sustaining the ecosystem integrity of Koh Phangan’s reefs.


NPC PROTEINS ARE KEY PLAYERS IN MOLECULAR INTERACTIONS BETWEEN
CNIDARIANS AND THEIR DINOFLAGELLATE ENDOSYMBIONTS (Abstract ID:
29721 | Poster ID: 131)
Cnidarians host their photosynthetic dinoflagellate symbionts in gastrodermal cells, in
a phagosome-derived vacuole. The establishment and maintenance of the symbiotic
interaction is dependent on intimate molecular communications, including recognition
and tolerance of symbionts, as well as adaptations for mutual transport and exchange of
nutritional resources. However, environmental perturbations, such as an increase in seawater temperature, may disrupt this partnership, leading to the severe worldwide decline
of coral reefs. Here, we will especially focus on the sterol-binding proteins Niemann-Pick
C (NPC1 and NPC2), which have been identified by transcriptomic analyses in symbiotic
sea anemones. While only one NPC2 gene is present in many metazoans, this gene has
been duplicated in cnidarians (at least four copies of NPC2 are detected). However, only
one gene (NPC2-d) was upregulated in symbiotic relative to aposymbiotic sea anemones. We investigated the subcellular localization of NPC proteins in the symbiotic sea
anemones Anemonia viridis and Aiptasia. We demonstrated that NPC1 is a biomarker
of the perisymbiotic membrane and highlighted a subfunctionalization of NPC2-d protein. Potential ligands of NPC2 proteins were also investigated using Isothermal Titration
Calorimetry. In symbiotic cnidarians, NPC proteins may be involved in sterol trafficking
but may also participate in symbiont selection and/or symbiont persistence, for example
by recognizing dinoflagellates cell-surface glycans. This may explain why several NPC2
genes have been retained in cnidarian genomes.


PATTERNS, CAUSES, AND CONSEQUENCES OF MARINE LARVAL DISPERSAL
(Abstract ID: 27896)
Quantifying the probability of larval exchange among marine populations is key to predicting local population dynamics and optimizing networks of marine protected areas.

76

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


sediments with some ending up onshore providing new land for mangrove to colonize,
others offshore contributing to iron fertilization and others nearshore where they end
up smothering seagrass and corals. We contend however, that this coarse model and
the paradigm that it supports paint only part of the sedimentation story. Nearshore
anthropogenic activities (such as mangrove conversion, coastal structure design and
mariculture intensity) equally, if not more significantly, contribute to the sedimentation
stress of coral reefs as demonstrated by RS time-series, finer-scale numerical models
and sediment budget calculations.

APPLYING BIG DATA TO CONSERVATION: AN INDO-PACIFIC SNAPSHOT OF
2300 CORAL REEFS TO INFORM CLIMATE RISK AND REFUGE (Abstract ID:
29953)
Threatened by climate change and anthropogenic impacts, tropical coral reefs face
unprecedented losses in biodiversity and ecosystem services in the coming decades.
Adaptation, resilience and survival are possible, but a coordinated strategy to guide
investments in conservation and management remains unclear. Here, we take a ‘big
data’ approach and compile the largest snapshot of contemporary reef coral biodiversity
in the Indian and Pacific Oceans from over 2300 sites in 51 counties and territories
provided collaboratively by 100 coral reef scientists (*the “Indo-Pacific Coral Collaboration”). We evaluate Scleractinian coral taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic diversity
from over 30,000 mixed-effects models to show that climate-driven ocean warming and
local anthropogenic stressors are the strongest drivers of regional coral biodiversity, and
that gradients of threat and biodiversity can inform conservation decisions. Our results
provide a data-driven portfolio that balances climate risk and refuge in one of the world’s
most threatened ecosystems, and calls for continued application of collaborative technology and big data science for coral reef conservation. We also discuss an emerging
collaboration of field scientists and technologists to develop a standardized open-source
database for global coral reef information.


IS YOUR SCIENCE GETTING THROUGH? COMMUNICATING SCIENCE-BASED
INFORMATION ON ECOSYSTEM BIODIVERSITY AND CLIMATE/DISASTER
RESILIENCE (Abstract ID: 28127 | Poster ID: 706)
Now more than ever, each and every one need to have some understanding of science,
which demands scientists to reach out to the public and communicate the science they
generate to help make informed decisions. To bridge communication gaps between
scientists, policy makers, and the public, we developed a wide array of communication materials by first identifying (1) who we need to inform (target audience), (2) what
they need to know, and (3) what is the most effective way of conveying the critical
information. It was crucial to distinguish effective means of delivering specific messages
to specific target audiences. We aimed to convey topics of ecosystem biodiversity interconnectivity, disaster risk reduction and management (DRRM), and climate change adaptation (CCA) to our identified groups (primary to tertiary school teachers and students,
decision makers and local stakeholders, and the general public). Specific communication
materials were developed for each particular group (interactive website, mobile app and
tabletop games, animations, media training for scientists, infographics, primer booklet,
postcards, telenovela). We also identified that the convergence of knowledge domains is
imperative for effective science communication. For each of the communication material developed, we emphasized the contributory role of coral reefs in biodiversity and in
providing ecosystem services such as food source; coastal integrity and protection; and
tourism and recreation.


DARWIN, PIONEER OF REEF TRANSECTS, REEF ECOLOGY AND ANCIENT
REEF MODELLING: SIGNIFICANCE OF HIS COCOS (KEELING) SPECIMENS IN
THE NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM, LONDON (Abstract ID: 29356 | Poster ID: 1)
David Stoddart made stimulating contributions to the history of coral reef studies and
Darwin’s work in particular, including reproduction of important MS material not previously published. We give interim results of our study of Darwin’s NHM reef specimens
from ‘his’ atoll, Cocos (Keeling). For Darwin this was his last chance during the Beagle
voyage to test his subsidence theory of coral reefs. He needed to show that reef-builders
were restricted to shallow water and grew most vigorously along reef fronts and edges
since this explained the saucer-like surface topography of atolls. He made qualitative
reef transects across the atoll rim, and with FitzRoy and crew made soundings on the
deeper reef front. Darwin put his results on to sketched profiles, pioneering the idea of
reef zonation in relation to depth and strength of water movement. We relocated his
NHM specimens on these profiles. Darwin also sketched two conceptual reef crosssections at Cocos (Keeling) to model his ideas on reef accretion on a subsiding foundation. They show the influence of Lyell his mentor in using his then new uniformitarian
principles to suggest how his model might apply to ancient reefs. While Darwin’s model
has proved too simple because glacioeustasy in particular was unknown at that time,
many of his other ideas, like subsidence, have lasted. His model is also notable for its
time for being based on evidence from fieldwork and specimens. Darwin pioneered studies of reef ecology, reef zonation and a unifying approach to the sedimentology of reef
growth, ancient and modern.


QUANTIFYING DAMAGE TO CORAL COLONIES BY WATERBORNE DEBRIS
DURING HYDRODYNAMIC DISTURBANCES (Abstract ID: 29085)
Physical bombardment by waterborne debris is a common disturbance in shallow coral
reef systems. Bombardment is especially ubiquitous during extreme hydrodynamic
disturbances, such as tropical storms. During a hydroydnamic disturbance, increases
in water velocity elevate drag forces acting on unattached objects—ranging in size
from sand to unattached coral colonies—propelling them into nearby coral colonies.
Bombardment can cause scouring and damage to coral tissue, intra-colony breakage
process of bombardment given that it difficult to observe in situ during hydrodynamic
disturbances. Therefore, we quantify the damage to coral colonies during such disturbances using photogrammetric scans of coral colonies and finite element analysis (FEA)
software. FEA models were created using 3D meshes derived from the scans for a range
of different coral growth forms. Models were attached at the base, and estimates of
substrate and coral skeleton strength were downloaded from the Coral Trait Database
and applied to the models. Bombardment scenarios consisted of spheres of a given size
being randomly shot at the FEA models at a range of velocities and the probability of
different damage types recorded. The model was validated using imagery of damaged
corals following a Category 3 tropical cyclone at Lizard Island on the Great Barrier Reef.
We were able to make accurate predictions about the extent of damage caused to corals
through bombardment during an extreme hydrodynamic disturbances.



SEDIMENT ON REEFS: WHO IS TO BLAME? (Abstract ID: 28139)

ACCLIMATION CAPACITY OF A CORAL-ALGAL SYMBIOTIC PARTNERSHIP TO
LONG-TERM WARMING AND ACIDIFICATION (Abstract ID: 28017)

Watershed land-use plays a crucial role in the amount of sediment that ends up on the
reefs. Remotely-sensed images make evident the interplay of land-use and atmospheric
disturbance resulting to higher sediment discharge. Coarse-grid numerical modelling
further demonstrates the role of wind-driven currents in influencing the fate of the

Elucidating the responses of symbiotic partners to environmental stressors is becoming
increasingly important as climate change disrupts biotic interactions worldwide. We
exposed the Caribbean coral Siderastrea sidereaand its Clade C symbiont to temperature
and pCO2 treatments for 95 days and quantified the transcriptomic responses of each
77

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

nonlinear internal wave dynamics on the fore reef of Dongsha Atoll, a coral reef in the
northern South China Sea. A DTS system measures temperature continuously along the
length of an optical fiber, resolving meter-to-kilometer spatial scales at 1-minute temporal resolution. This unique view of cross-shelf temperature structure made it possible to
track internal waves across the shallow fore reef and onto the reef flat and to quantify
spatial patterns in temperature variability.

partner using RNAseq. Both elevated temperature and pCO2 elicited strong but divergent
responses of the host’s transcriptome. High temperatures disrupted molecular homeostasis and substantially reduced calcification rates. Conversely, elevated pCO2 enhanced
host transcription of genes associated with respiration and hydrogen ion transport, with
only minimal effects on calcification rates—underscoring the role of proton transport in
calcification maintenance under elevated pCO2, while also suggesting costs associated with this acclimation. Contrary to the host, the symbiont’s transcriptome exhibited
little change in response to elevated pCO2. Instead, population-specific transcriptomic
responses were observed across fore-reef and near-shore environments—consistent
with observed differences in symbiont photosynthetic efficiency across these two reefs.
We conclude that host transcriptomic plasticity promotes acclimation to ocean acidification, but not necessarily warming. Given the host’s strong transcriptomic responses to
acidification and warming, coupled with the symbiont’s lack of response, we hypothesize
that hosts actively buffer their symbiont’s environment.


40 YEARS OF BENTHIC COMMUNITY CHANGE AT THE FORE-REEF SLOPE (10
– 40 M) OF THE CARIBBEAN REEFS IN CURACAO AND BONAIRE: THE RISE OF
CYANOBACTERIAL MATS (Abstract ID: 28326)


THE CHALLENGES OF MANAGING SUGARCANE CULTIVATION IN THE GREAT
BARRIER REEF CATCHMENT AREA (Abstract ID: 28420)

In the past decades benthic sessile communities of tropical coral reefs have undergone
significant changes worldwide. Generally, there was a shift from stony corals to fleshy
macroalgae. Long-term studies documenting changes in other benthic reef groups, however, are scarce. We have studied change in dominant benthic groups at 4 reef sites in
the Caribbean islands of Curaçao and Bonaire over a time-span of 40 years. Permanent
3 x 3 m quadrats at 10, 20, 30 and 40 m depth have been photographed at intervals since
1973. The temporal and spatial dynamics in cover of dominant benthic groups [corals,
macroalgae, sponges, cyanobacteria, algal turf and crustose coralline algae (CCA)] were
assessed based on image point-analyses. Our results show a strong decrease in the
cover of calcifying groups averaged over all sites and depths from 32.9% [1973] to 9.2%
[2013] for coral and for CCA from 6.4% to 0.95%. Initially, coral cover is replaced by turf
algae (24.5% to 45.3%) and fleshy macroalgae (0% to 12%). These new dominants are
however largely reduced from 2000 to 2013 (10.8% and 2.2%, resp.), signalling the rise
of benthic cyanobacterial mats (BCM). BCM become the most dominant component
increasing from a mere 0.1% [1973] to 22% [2013]. This is accompanied by a small
increase in sponge cover (0.5% to 2.3%). Strikingly, the observed pattern of degradation
and phase change was seen down to mesophotic depths of 40 m. These results suggest
that reefs dominated by algae may be less stable than previously thought and that the
next phase may be the domination by slimy cyanobacterial mats.

Sugarcane cultivation represents one of the primary land uses in Australia’s Word
Heritage Listed Great Barrier Reef catchment area. With it’s identification as a key
contributor of coastal nutrient and pesticide exports to marine environments, the
sugarcane industry has been the target of considerable natural resource management
investment and regulation by various levels of government for more than two decades.
Recent combinations of water quality and land use (on-farm) practice change monitoring and modelling suggest results of this considerable long-term investment have been
mixed in terms of demonstrable progress towards desired water quality targets. A
number of emergent lessons and information gaps are increasingly emerging as critical
challenges in addressing these shortfalls including; the challenge of water quality communication extension strategies at the science-industry interface; the spatial variability
and development of pollution ‘hotspots’ from ‘diffuse’ agricultural pollution, the often
locally specific (and in some cases directly contrasting) nature of appropriate on-farm
best-management-practices to reduce pollutant losses from farms; and the need for
carefully considered, strategic development of on-farm practices to avoid the potential
for unanticipated, perverse outcomes from regulation. These themes underline the
complexity of managing diffuse agricultural pollution, the general lack of ‘silver bullet’
solutions to agricultural pollution in the Great Barrier Reef, and the need for flexible,
adaptive management frameworks.


(Abstract ID: 28216)

NOVEL SURVEY METHOD FOR BIOFLUORESCENT FISHES FINDS LOW ABUNDANCES OF PYGMY SEAHORSES IN INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 28158 | Poster ID: 501)

A handbook on coral reef impacts: avoidance, minimization, compensatory mitigation,
and restoration summarizes the present governmental US compliance practices. The
handbook represents practices from the 19 US Coral Reef Task Force members (12
federal and 7 local government jurisdictions). This includes practices for planned and
unplanned in-water events such as dredging, filling and ship groundings. For planned
events a two tiered approach that manages mapping, characterization, alternatives
analysis, and compensatory mitigation is presented. For unplanned events, the Natural
Resource Damage Assessment process, emergency response, and restoration are
addressed. Both consider replacement of lost ecosystem functions and restoration of
public trust resources. The Handbook addresses the spectrum of federal and local statutory and regulatory policies for coral reef impacts and the challenges of applying these
to coral reefs. It serves as a compendium of practices, case studies, and references. The
target audience for this document is agency natural resource managers, proponents of
development projects, and incident responders.

Pygmy seahorses (Hippocampus spp.) are iconic species which are important to
SCUBA diving tourism in Southeast Asia. They have been shown to be one of the main
drawcards for tourists visiting dive destinations and make significant contributions to
the income of local coastal communities. Seahorses are considered vulnerable and
threats of pygmy seahorses is limited and all IUCN- assessed species are listed as data
deficient. Research is hampered by the cryptic nature of pygmy seahorses. Their very
small size and excellent camouflage makes it difficult to find them using traditional
survey methods. We report a new method using biofluoresence for surveying pygmy
to fluoresce. Further research showed that this biofluorescence could be used as an
across Indonesia (Bali, Nusa Tenggara, North-Sulawesi, Raja Ampat) revealed very low
occupancy rates (13.7%) of host seafans (Muricella sp.). Additional surveys revealed that
this method is not limited to pygmy seahorses. Another 84 cryptic fish species fluoresced
at the survey sites, opening up the possibilities of using fluorescence as a survey tool for
a wide variety of understudied cryptic species.



CORAL REEFS IN THE (INTERNAL) SURF ZONE: EXTREME VARIABILITY IN
28301 | Poster ID: 307)

HOW FAST AND EFFICIENT SPONGE ENGINES DRIVE AND MODULATE THE
FOOD WEB OF SHALLOW AND DEEP-SEA REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 28696)
Ever since Darwin’s early descriptions of reefs, it has been a mystery how one of earth’s
most productive and diverse ecosystems thrives in oligotrophic seas, as an oasis in a marine desert. The recently discovered sponge loop pathway shows how sponges efficiently
retain and transfer energy and nutrients on reefs, recognizing their (so far neglected) role
as key ecosystem drivers. Evidence now accumulates on sponge loops in other ecosystems, such as deep-sea coral reefs. As a result, current reef food web models lacking
sponge-driven resource cycling are incomplete and need to be redeveloped. However,

Internal waves are an important process affecting water properties in the coastal ocean
and have been observed to influence physical variability on many shallow reefs exposed
to deeper waters. Shoaling internal waves can drive strong flows and transport dense,
subthermocline water into shallow depths, changing not only the temperature of the water on the reef, but also pH, oxygen, and nutrient concentrations. In June 2014 we used a
Distributed Temperature Sensing (DTS) system to give a continuous cross-shelf view of

78

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

bleaching event, allow managers to communicate quickly with decision makers and
the public to reduce local stressors; certain countries have even closed major dive and
regions potentially resilient to climate change, aiding marine protected area planning.
This poster discusses applications of CRW’s DSS to local coral reef management. CRW
directly engages local stakeholders and incorporates user feedback into product development and enhancement. This ensures CRW can provide coral reef managers worldwide
with climate-quality, consistent, authoritative information on present and future severity
of threats that lead to coral bleaching, disease and other impacts.

mechanisms that determine the capacity of sponge ‘engines’, how they are fuelled, and
drive communities are unknown. I will discuss the establishment of a novel reef food
web framework, integrating sponges as key ecosystem drivers. To this end, existing critical knowledge gaps at both organismal and community scale will be identified. Sponges
will be evaluated on functional traits (morphology, associated microbes, pumping capacity) in the processing of dissolved food, the main fuel of the sponge engine. To what
extent these different functional traits are a driving force in structuring reef ecosystems,
from fuel input (primary producers), to engine output (driving and modulating the
consumer food web) will be assessed at the community level. The resulting framework
will be implemented in a sponge-driven food web model, a much-needed foundation to
test and predict future scenarios of changes in shallow tropical and temperate as well as
cold-water deep-sea reef communities.



MANAGEMENT IN SAN FELIPE KEY, A CUBAN NATIONAL PARK, BASED ON
Poster ID: 654)

RECOGNIZING BEST PRACTICES IN MPA AND MPA NETWORK MANAGEMENT
IN THE PHILIPPINES: THE PARA EL MAR (MPA AWARDS AND RECOGNITION)
(Abstract ID: 29276)

The San Felipe Keys are located in the Southwest platform of Cuba and were declared
National Park in 2010, due to its high ecological value. However, the management plan
did not take into account coral reef condition and present fishing activities for more than
60 years. Monitoring of coral health indicators and reef fish associations was conducted
with visual census and stereo video between 2013 and 2015. An annual finfish fisheries
assessment (2014) was obtained based on catch sample, using length-frequency and gonads
maturity analysis. Results showed that bioerosion processes, like bleaching, coral diseases
and incrusting organisms, were more active than accretion, especially in zones with higher
reef complexity. Fish associations are dominated by small fish and large commercial
species are rare (parrot fish, groupers, snappers and other top predators). Also, evidence of
snapper’s reproductive migration and spawning aggregation sites in areas inside and outside
the Park were obtained. Close to 25% of fish catch are unreported and snappers were the
most abundant group caught. Overall, 40% of annual catches occurred during reproductive
season and 70% of individuals were caught with mature gonads. Yet, a high percentage
was captured before reaching the first maturity length, especially Lutjanus analis (80%)
and Lutjanus cyanopterus (95%) due to problems in its minimum size. Responding to the
confounded local situation, we provide management advice to aid in the conservation of
ecosystem biodiversity and to promote sustainable fishing practices to deal with overfishing.

Marine protected areas (MPA) and MPA networks have been proven to achieve conservation and fisheries goals. Improving the management of these MPAs and networks
is crucial to better achieve these goals. In 2007, the Philippine MPA Support Network
(MSN) developed the biennial Para el MAR ( MPA Awards and Recognition) to provide
incentives for good MPA management by giving recognition and awards to the bestmanaged MPAs and networks in the Philippines. This paper highlights the experiences
networks is when governance mechanisms such as legislation, effective management
body and management plans are in place. Consistency of key management activities
such as enforcement, information education and communication, capacity building, as
well as monitoring and sustainability mechanisms such as financing, are crucial in effective management. The Para el MAR has become a sharing and learning venue for these
best practices. This has encouraged the MPAs and networks to increase their efforts
and improve management. The Para el MAR has enhanced their pride of place and has
helped leverage support from private and public partners to improve management in
Marine Key Biodiversity Areas (MKBA) where the MPAs and networks are located such
as the Verde Island Passage and Lanuza Bay.


IMPACT OF LAND USE AND NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION ON CORAL REEF
ECOSYSTEM HEALTH IN WEST MAUI, HAWAII (Abstract ID: 27860 | Poster ID: 421)


Coral reef health is affected by multiple factors. Although coral reefs are resilient systems,
the combination of stressors is proving disastrous. In the past 17 years, West Maui coral
cover in near shore reefs declined an average of 37%. Nonpoint source pollution is one of
the most prevalent sources of contaminants, which affect aquatic organisms by disrupting
ecosystem functions, causing changes in the food chain dynamics and altering species
reproduction, growth and behavior. Corals respond to the presence of pollutants by
expressing and activating detoxification enzymes. By measuring these enzymes, we can
identify the stress level of corals, prior to outright death. The goal of my project is to study
which pollutants reach the ocean in West Maui, their availability to marine biota and the
corals’ molecular responses. I will determine water and sediment contaminant load by
Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS), below two sites, during two years. I
will be measuring the amount of contaminants in algae, corals, and echinoderms as bioindicators for coral reef ecosystem health, by GC-MS, to determine bioaccumulation and
biomagnification. Expression and activity of detoxification enzymes in coral samples will
be assessed by Western Blot and spectrophotometry, respectively. Results from this study
will provide information about the quality of the runoff reaching the ocean in West Maui,
its bioavailability, and corals’ sublethal responses. This knowledge is essential to make
adjustments in ecosystem management, to prevent further decline and allow its recovery.

APPLICATION OF NOAA CORAL REEF WATCH’S NEAR-REAL-TIME SATELLITE
AND MODEL-BASED DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM TO LOCAL CORAL REEF
MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 27989 | Poster ID: 619)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Coral Reef Watch
(CRW) program uses satellite, in-situ, and modeled data to deliver online a global decision support system (DSS) that helps managers prepare for and respond to coral reef
environmental stress. Near-real-time satellite products are derived from sea surface
temperature, light, wind, and ocean color data. Weekly to seasonal forecasts project
future reef conditions, informing national and international assessments, management
responses, and conservation planning. CRW’s DSS is the only global early-warning system for the reef environment. It assists environmental impact monitoring, bleaching risk
assessments, and preparation/implementation of timely, effective protective responses
and adaptation actions. CRW’s alerts of mass bleaching, such as the ongoing global

DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF LIGHT AND FEEDING ON NEW RECRUITS OF
PORITES ASTREOIDES FROM TWO REEF SITES WITHIN BERMUDA (Abstract ID:
29522 | Poster ID: 204)
Early life history stages of corals may be more susceptible to environmental changes than
adults. Furthermore, inter-site variations in environmental parameters may promote differen79

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

tial responses to changes. Larvae were collected from Porites astreoides colonies from two
sites in Bermuda, an offshore rim reef and an inshore patch reef, and the settled recruits
were reared for 6 weeks in replicate aquaria under two light levels (mean 200 and 30 µE m-2
s-1) and were either unfed or fed brine shrimp three times a week. Larval size at collection
and new recruit size at 10 days, 4 weeks and 6 weeks were measured by photographic
image analysis. Rim reef colonies produced significantly larger larvae and new recruits.
When unfed, mean recruit size significantly increased only under the low light treatment,
irrespective of reef site of origin. When fed, recruits from the patch reef larvae significantly
increased in size under both light levels. In contrast, whereas fed recruits from the rim reef
larvae increased in size under low light, there was no size change for fed recruits reared under high light. Feeding increased survivorship, although all recruits held under high light had
greater mortality. Feeding also increased zooxanthellae density except for recruits reared
from the larger rim reef larvae that remained sensitive to higher light. This study provides
insight into factors affecting coral recruitment success and documents the occurrence of
functional variability in larvae and recruits of the same species between different reef sites.

SUCCESSIVE PHASES OF REEF FLAT DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT THE
HOLOCENE: INFLUENCE OF HYDRODYNAMIC ENERGY AND SEA-LEVEL
CHANGE ON THE GREAT BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 28525)
The response of platform reefs to sea-level stabilization over the past 6 ka is well
established for the Great Barrier Reef (GBR), typically accreting laterally from windward
to leeward. However, this interpretation is based on few cores spread across a range of
reef zones and may not fully capture the response of reefs to the Holocene stillstand,
including the timing of when they first approached sea-level and the direction, rate and
continuity of reef flat accretion. We present a new record of reef flat accretion based
on 49 U/Th ages from closely spaced transects at Heron and One Tree reefs, combined
occurred in growth from 3.6 ka to 1.6 ka in the northern, south-central and southern
We conclude that a relative fall in sea-level (~0.5 m), 4-3.5 ka is the most likely explanation for why reef flats in the north and south turned off during this period. Greater
hydro-isostatic adjustment of the central GBR and subsidence of the Halifax basin may
have provided greater vertical accommodation for the mid-outer platform reefs of the
central GBR, allowing them to continue to accrete vertically, despite a relative sea level
fall. Further, our results demonstrate that hydrodynamic energy is the main driver of
accretional direction, with exposed reefs accreting primarily lagoonward, while protected
reefs accrete seawards, contrary to the traditional GBR growth model of windward to
leeward directed accretion.


IS PAGODA CORAL TURBINARIA MESENTERINA (LAMARK, 1816), A SUCCEEDER OF RECENT CORAL BLEACHING EVENT IN THE SOUTH EASTERN
ARABIAN SEA? (Abstract ID: 29040)
To monitor 2014-15 El Niño driven coral bleaching,we studied species specific variations of bleaching severity and settlement of turf algae on bleached colonies at two
permanent photo quadrat with coral colony tagging and 50m Line Intercept transects
were carried out to determine bleaching extent. Both the sites were characterized by
low scleractinian diversity (18 and 15 species, respectively), high macroalgae cover(66%
Turbinaria mesenterina colonies mostly unaffected. Bleaching severity was estimated
bleached followed by Plesiastrea sp.(79% and 62%),Favites (91% and 45%). By contrast,
subsequent to the bleaching event in both the study sites, further hasten coral mortality.
Considering our observations,we point out that ruinous impact of this bleaching event
could shift coral community structure from massive and encrusting species to foliaceous


CARIBBEAN SPONGE PATHOLOGY – THE DIAGNOSIS IS NOT ALWAYS SIMPLE
(Abstract ID: 28815)
Despite increasing reports, little is known about the pathologies of coral reef sponges.
When sponges die, they leave little evidence of their presence behind; therefore, studying
sponge pathologies requires temporal monitoring. For example, long-term monitoring
of the Caribbean giant barrel sponge Xestospongia muta led to the characterization of
sponge orange band (SOB), which often kills the sponge and leaves nothing behind.
Despite a decade of research, no specific pathogen or environmental stressor has been
Koch’s postulates for a sponge disease. Given the diversity of sponges and their variable
responses to biotic and abiotic factors, a broader approach is required that considers
disease-causing microorganisms, environmental stressors, or a combination of these two.
Here we report a new pathogenic condition, Agelas Wasting Syndrome (AWS) of the
brown tube sponge, Agelas tubulata (cf. conifera). The tissue loss from AWS was previously
interpreted as predatory bite-marks on sponges until individual sponges were monitored
over time. This example is the converse of that recently described for the yellow tube
sponge Aplysina fistularis, which displays pathogenic tissue damage that was found to
be the result of predation by cowries that live at the base of the sponge tubes and feed
nocturnally. Sponge pathologies need to be studied carefully and on a species-by-species
basis, with particular attention paid to sponge ecology and temporal monitoring.


INTERACTION BETWEEN COMMUNITY METABOLISM AND REEF WATER PH
ON A CORAL ATOLL IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA (Abstract ID: 28930)
The CaCO3 skeletons of reef calcifiers comprise the building blocks that form coral reef
structures. In laboratory and mesocosm experiments, calcification rates of corals and
other reef calcifiers decline under elevated CO2 concentrations, raising concerns for the
future of coral reef ecosystems under 21st century ocean acidification. However, the
chemical environment on coral reefs is strongly modulated by the benthic community
and can be quite different from the open ocean. This complicates efforts to project
ocean acidification impacts on coral reefs. We investigated the drivers of reef water
pH and net community calcification (NCC) on Dongsha Atoll, a remote coral reef
ecosystem in the northern South China Sea. In June 2014, diurnal-average NCC was 420
± 80 mmol CaCO3 m-2 day-1, greater than any other coral reef studied to date, despite
comparable calcifier cover (25%) and open ocean pH (~8.0 – 8.1). Such high NCC rates
are likely driven by high daytime on-reef pH (~8.5), which is significantly elevated above
that of the adjacent open ocean. Elevated on-reef pH is a consequence of high daytime
net community productivity (NCP), most likely caused by high benthic cover of algae
(19%) and seagrass (16%). A transient coral bleaching event reduced NCC and daytime
NCP by ~50% and in turn decreased average on-reef pH by 0.2 units, in the absence
between community metabolism (NCC and NCP) and reef water pH that will modulate
the sensitivity of coral reefs to future open ocean acidification.


AN OASIS IN THE DESERT: SOURCING CORALS FROM HARBORS FOR REEF
RESTORATION (Abstract ID: 28212 | Poster ID: 306)
The continuous decline of coral reef throughout the world due to anthropogenic activities has encouraged the development of different mitigation strategies, many of which
80

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


involve the creation of artificial reefs or the transplantation of corals onto impacted
reefs. Both of these strategies involve the need for source corals for the mitigation, as the
natural recruitment and growth of coral larvae into adult colonies displaces lost ecological services for too great a period. In Hawaii, where corals grow only a few centimeters
a year, this issue is pronounced. Hawaii’s Division of Aquatic Resources (DAR) has
introduced an innovative strategy to source coral material from boat harbors by removing coral colonies from man-made structures within the harbors, thereby minimizing
the impact to wild colonies while selecting coral colonies that have already shown to be
resistant to higher SSTs, sewage discharges, pollutants, sedimentation and survival under
these dynamic conditions. Such corals may be one answer to improve rehabilitation success on deteriorated reefs. Harvested corals are fragmented down into small fragments
and grown out with an exceptional fast growth rate under high maintenance conditions;
once they reach an optimal larger size they are re-aggregated into adult colonies which
are then transplanted onto natural degraded coral reefs.

UNIQUE STRUCTURE OF REEF FISH COMMUNITIES IN EAST AFRICA- A
STUDY ACROSS 24 DEGREES OF LATITUDE (Abstract ID: 29041)
The coral reefs of East Africa are some of the last to receive in depth surveys and
assessments of the structure of their reef fish communities. To date there have been no
broad scale studies conducted within a single time period. From Kenya to Mozambique
across 24 degrees of latitude, 2,496, 25 m transects at 208 sites structured hierarchically
with four sites nested in four locations within 13 regions were performed. This structure
allowed us to assess latitudinal patterns, and the spatial scales that are significant in
structuring reef fish communities. Data revealed that typical patterns of decreasing
diversity, species turn over, and gradual shift in assemblages structure were not as
defined as they are on other coastlines. Diversity peaked at ~11°S, and decreased
structure did not consistently change with latitude and only two main groupings were
species turnover with over 60% of the species shared across all regions, and between
the most northern and southern region over 68% of species were shared. Reefs were
highly heterogeneous at spatial scales <10 km. Spatial variability at this scale overrides
the processes operating at larger spatial scales leading to the high level of homogeneity
scene across the entire coastline. These results have implications for trans-boundary
conservation and management efforts, and the definition of biogeographic boundaries.


MASS CORAL LARVAL RESEEDING IS A VIABLE OPTION FOR ENHANCING
RECRUITMENT AND RESTORING DEGRADED REEFS (Abstract ID: 28445)
Restoring degraded ecosystems is essential for mitigating the effects of anthropogenic
impacts and for maintaining biological diversity to ensure the continuous flow of
ecosystem goods and services. For coral reefs, innovative restoration technologies aimed
at larger scale interventions are considered to be one of the primary potential solutions
to the rapid and increasing global problem of reef degradation. This study used low-cost
mass larval settlement enclosures to significantly increase coral recruitment on degraded
coral reef areas in northwestern Philippines. Acropora tenuislarvae were cultured ex-situ
after colonies spawned, and approximately 400,000 competent larvae were transported
and retained in each of four replicate 6 x 4 m reef ‘reseeded’ plots. Four adjacent 6 x 4
m plots were used as non-seeded control plots for comparison. Immediately after the
settlement period, recruitment on tiles in the reseeded plots was very significantly higher
(mean 27 ± 13 spat per tile) than in control plots, in which no single recruit was record.
substrata or on tiles during subsequent monitoring up to 24 mo. After 2 years, a mean of
results show that mass coral larval ‘reseeding’ is an effective method for quickly enhancing larval settlement and stimulating recruitment on degraded but recoverable reef areas,
and can rapidly initiate new coral populations.


AN INTEGRATIVE INVESTIGATION INTO THE IMPACTS OF ANTHROPOGENIC
STRESSORS ON DEEP-SEA CORALS (Abstract ID: 28388)
As critical inhabitants of deep-sea ecosystems, corals produce complex, heterogeneous
habitat and positively influence biodiversity. Further study of these long-lived, slow
growing animals is urgently required for conservation purposes, as they are becoming
increasingly affected by anthropogenic disturbances like the Deepwater Horizon (DWH)
oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico. An unprecedented amount of oil and chemical
dispersants were released into the deep-sea during the spill and subsequent cleanup efforts. Detrimental effects have since been documented including impacts to deep-water
corals. Live exposure experiments were conducted to investigate the toxicity of oil and
dispersants on two coral species, Callogorgia delta andParamuricea type B3. The treatments containing dispersants had a more pronounced effect than oil treatments alone.
In addition, transcriptomic investigations using DWH spill-impacted corals revealed
exposure-induced variations in gene expression including the over-expression of genes
coding for Cytochrome p450 (CYP1A1), Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factors (TRAFs) and additional genes involved in toxin processing, innate immunity and
wound repair. These genes among others found in our expression data serve as useful
biomarker candidates for assessing and monitoring future anthropogenic impacts. Our
results also provide insights into the stress responses of deep-sea corals, implications of
applying dispersants to oil spills and a novel reference assembly for a relatively understudied group of cold-water corals.


SUSTAINING STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION IN MARINE PROTECTED AREA
NETWORKS IN LANUZA BAY, SOUTHEASTERN PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 28567)
Developing innovative ways to increase stakeholder participation and sustainable
financing of marine protected area (MPA) management are the focal areas of work in
Lanuza Bay. It is in Southeastern Philippines, facing the Pacific Ocean and managed by
the Lanuza Bay Development Alliance (LBDA). The primary threat to Lanuza Bay arises
from illegal, unregulated and unsustainable fishing. Runoff and pollution from land-based
activities such as mining, logging, and wood processing and forest conversion are also a
growing threats. At least two reef-associated fish species are depleted and near local extinction. In response, an ecological network of 16 MPAs was established with sizes ranging from 21 to 75 hectares. Each MPA has a fisher organization managing it with support
including accident and health insurance, and monthly stipend from the local government,
and the LBDA, and Nagkahiusang Mananagat na Nag-amping sa Kadagatan sa Lanuza
Bay (NAMANAKA), a baywide social network of fisher organizations. NAMANAKA was
established to address issues facing each MPA, capacity-building, organizational development, and sustainable financing. Using the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool
(METT), scores range between 12 to 29, and an overall score of 18 out of 45. Among
the identified needs include women participation in decision-making in the overall
baywide management, strengthening the LBDA and NAMANAKA, developing new
financing mechanisms for MPA management, and increasing awareness of legislators
and the general public on biodiversity and MPA information.


CONTRASTING HABITAT UTILIZATION OF TARGETED REEF FISH SPAWNERS
AND JUVENILES: SUPPORT FOR ARCHIPELAGO SCALE MANAGEMENT OF
THE MAIN HAWAIIAN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 28480)
Spawning capacity and survival of juveniles are critical determinants of fish population
fitness and depend on habitat characteristics, such as refuge availability. Spatially explicit
models, which can predict spawner and juvenile abundance while identifying habitats
important for spawning and recruitment success, can provide important information for
marine spatial planning. This study coupled fish surveys and remotely sensed maps of
habitat complexity and composition, wave exposure and human influence at multiple
81

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Recreational marine resource use is conducted by a varied group of visitors. Regardless
of how minimal this resource use is, or what intentions these visitors have, impacts on
these resources are unavoidable. Management authorities of these resources need to
know the extent of these impacts to further steer management towards protection of
these resources. Traditional monitoring of visitors in the past has relied on self-reported
behavior by visitors themselves. Self-reporting is not always accurate and cannot be
relied upon. This study gathered data on snorkeler’s intentions, attitudes, and perceived
control to not damaging the coral reef when snorkelling. Furthermore, snorkelers were
monitored to obtain actual snorkel behavior These snorkelers were then asked if they
contacted the reef during their snorkel activity (the self-report measure for comparison).
This research paper shows that even though snorkelers in the Mombasa Marine Park
had intentions not to disturb the reef when they snorkel, and also indicated having
positive attitudes about not disturbing the reef when they snorkel, they still created
impacts on the reef. Furthermore, their self-reported behavior did not correspond with
their actual monitored behavior. Monitoring snorkeler behavior is time-consuming and is
therefore paired with financial investment, however, if this method is the most accurate
method of gathering impact data to be used for management purposes, no other data
collecting method should be considered, definitely not one that has been shown to be
inaccurate (such as self-reported behavior).

scales, with geographical information systems and machine learning methods to predict
and map targeted reef fish spawner and juvenile abundance, with a focus on surgeonfishes and parrotfishes, for the Main Hawaiian Islands (MHI). This process revealed that:
(1) predictive performance varied by life stage and family across islands; (2) areas with
very abundant spawners and juveniles rarely overlapped; (3) key environmental factors
included distance to human population, wave exposure, and longitude, with spawners
influenced by habitat complexity at multiple scales and juveniles driven by latitude,
mesoscale habitat complexity and habitat composition (coral cover); and (4) predicted
abundance of surgeonfish and parrotfish spawners were highest on the islands of Maui
and Molokai respectively, while surgeonfish juveniles were concentrated on Hawai’i
Island, with juvenile parrotfishes being most abundant on Oahu. This study provides
high-resolution, spatially-explicit information regarding fisheries production and supports
managing the MHI at the archipelago scale.

COMPARATIVE REPRODUCTION AND GROWTH OF THE PARROTFISHES OF
HAWAII: INPUT FOR MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS AND STOCK ASSESSMENT
(Abstract ID: 27810)


Parrotfishes (Labridae, Scarinae) rank among the most economically important reef
fishes in Hawaii and throughout the tropical Pacific. Many of these protogynous
(female-first, sex-changing) fishes are also major habitat engineers of great ecological
significance. Yet few data exist on their reproductive dynamics or vital rates in Hawaii
or elsewhere. A single minimum body length (12 inches fork length) for the take of
parrotfish (“uhu”) is presently in effect in the State of Hawaii even though the multiple
species contributing to the fishery differ in their fundamental life histories. For this reason
we estimated body sizes at female sexual maturity and at sex change from female to
male, plus growth rates and longevities, using specimens collected during 2005-2007
and 2012-2014 on Oahu, for the five major (of seven total) species of parrotfishes in the
local fishery. Median sizes at maturity (from immature to adult female) differed greatly
among the five major species, and sizes at sex change (from adult female to secondary
male) were proportional to lengths at female maturity and estimated maximum lengths
of the respective species. Growth rates and longevities likewise differed greatly among
species but with less proportionality among species than did length-at-maturity and
length-at-sex change. Changes in minimum size regulations, in concert with a slot-size
limit that protects the largest individuals of both sexes, are suggested for the two largest,
fishery-dominant species.

FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY OF THE REEF FISH FAUNA ALONG THE LATITUDINAL GRADIENT OF TAIWAN (Abstract ID: 28296 | Poster ID: 508)
a major determinant of the ecosystem resilience. For the global reef fish fauna, FD has
been shown to be sensitive to species loss and a particularly good indicator of environmental disturbances. In Taiwan, reef fish fauna decreases from South to North correlated
to the distribution of Sea Surface Temperature. We analyze how this latitudinal gradient
affects the functional redundancy and vulnerability of reef fish communities around
Taiwan. Ecological niches of 1,447 reef fish species were described using a combination
of 6 functional traits known for influencing ecosystem processes. Most of traits values
were obtained from database and others were allocated based on authors’ knowledge of
the species. The number of functional entities (FEs), the functional redundancy (FR), and
functional vulnerability (FV) were derived from species richness in 3 regions spanned
with increasing latitudes. It was accompanied by a decrease of FV and an erosion of
are less sensitive and could demonstrate higher resilience abilities than tropical ones.
However, abrupt decrease of species recorded at some high-latitude sites along the last
decade suggests that environmental modifications around Taiwan could even imperil the
fewer highly redundant functional entities in those locations.



THE CONTRIBUTION OF DIFFERENT PHOTOTROPHIC ORGANISMS TO THE
PRIMARY PRODUCTIVITY OF A CARIBBEAN CORAL REEF COMMUNITY
(Abstract ID: 27782 | Poster ID: 279)
While many coral reef communities worldwide have shifted from coral to algal dominance, not much is known on whether these changes in community composition have
affected the primary productivity of altered reef communities. Using 13C labeling, we
quantified the primary production (PP) rates for several dominant benthic and planktonic
autotrophs at 5 and 20 m depth on a typical modern Caribbean coral reef. Primary
productivity per unit biomass (in mg C [g dry weight]-1 h-1) was lowest for corals
(0.03-0.05), followed by macroalgae (0.41-1.89) and turf algae (0.82-1.68), and highest for
benthic cyanobacteria (4.48-6.02). By combining taxon-specific PP rates with estimates
of their area-specific biomass, we found that turf algae contributed most (>65%) to the
total primary productivity of reef communities at 5 m depth. At 20 m depth, macroalgae
and phytoplankton each contributed ~40% to the productivity of the entire reef community while the contribution of corals, turf algae and benthic cyanobacteria was <10%.
Comparison of our findings to those of a similar study conducted at the same location
40 years ago shows that turf algae and macroalgae have replaced corals and crustose
coralline algae as main contributors to the total productivity of Caribbean reef communities.

TYPHOONS AND THE MANAGED REEFS: IMPACTS AND RECOVERY PATTERNS
OF REEF BENTHOS AND THEIR ASSOCIATED FISH ASSEMBLAGES (Abstract ID:
29295 | Poster ID: 417)
Super typhoon Bopha (Pablo) hit and devastated large areas in Southern Philippines in
December 2012 profoundly affecting their associated reef areas. This study examined
the impacts and recovery patterns of reef benthos and their associated fish assemblages
in two Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in Surigao del Sur. The benthic cover and their
associated reef fishes were monitored 2 years before and 4 years after typhoon. Coral
covers of both MPAs were affected after typhoon resulting to decline coral cover while
dead coral with algae and rubble increased. Hard corals such as branching and foliose
lifeforms were severely affected. Uba MPA had lower coral cover than Ayoke MPA
potentially due to its exposure to wave action. Uba is more exposed while Ayoke is
relatively sheltered. In addition, the abrupt decline in coral cover at Ayoke was exacerbated by Crown-of-Thorns outbreak. Fish species richness, abundance and biomass at
both MPAs were not affected by the typhoon. In fact abundance and biomass increased
despite of these disturbances. After 4 years, coral cover continued to decline with no


SELF-REPORTED BEHAVIOR, INTENTIONS AND CONTROL MEASURES OF
SNORKELERS IN THE MOMBASA MARINE PARK-DO SNORKELERS DO WHAT
THEY INTEND TO DO, AND SAY THEY DO? (Abstract ID: 29166 | Poster ID: 628)

82

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

metabolic precursors that the coral itself cannot synthesize. In exchange, the host
provides its symbionts with material that they can catabolize and feed into their own
biosynthetic pathways. The inability to maintain these symbiotic interactions when challenged by an environmental stressor, such as increased sea surface temperature, leads
