13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


TOWARDS DEVELOPING A FRAMEWORK FOR REEF RESILIENCE: A GREAT
BARRIER REEF CASE STUDY (Abstract ID: 29211)
The resilience of the Great Barrier Reef to a changing climate is predicted to vary
greatly across the 344,400 km2 and 2,900 individual reefs that make up the world
heritage site. Resilience-based management allows responsive adaptation to this challenge. Understanding the capacity of the reef to resist and recover from a broad range
of threats and disturbances it faces is crucial for long-term protection. The science of
resilience has increasingly become the focus for measuring and managing reef health,
however there are still significant gaps when it comes to how to operationalise resiliencebased management. The Great Barrier Reef Foundation is convening experts in reef
science, conservation and management to develop a globally applicable Reef Resilience
Framework. The approach in developing the framework is integrative, collaborative and
practical – it recognises the complexity of the ecosystem, is underpinned by the adaptive
management principle and is cognisant of the need for communities as well as the ecosystems to adapt to climate change. The framework is intended to provide a mechanism
to drive action towards building reef resilience and support resilience planning. It will aid
in the assessment and prioritisation of key threats and support decision-making, particularly in relation to the implementation of effective management solutions designed to
enhance ecosystem resilience.

RESILIENCE-BASED MANAGEMENT IN REMOTE ATOLLS OF THE INDIAN OCEAN:
AN OPERATIONAL CASE STUDY FROM THE MALDIVES (Abstract ID: 29591)
The Maldives is an archipelago containing approximately 1200 coral reef islands with more
than 305 that harbor communities and permanent settlements that are heavily dependent
on reef resources. Due to its vulnerability to climate change and its high resource-dependence, an urgent need to incorporate resilience science into conservation planning and
local management was identified. Detailed ecological and socio-economic data for coral
reefs and local communities were collected and mapped at a national scale. We developed
a management framework that explicitly incorporates both ecological and social resilience,
variations in human impact, uncertainty, and identifies the necessary interventions required
to address multiple objectives in different atolls. The analysis identified atoll areas regularly
used by local communities and private sector resorts, areas that present potential conflict
between users, and finally ecologically significant areas. Specific locations were designated
conservation priorities as they contain both ecological and social values that are not
currently addressed by any existing management scheme. Systematic conservation and
spatial planning processes were useful in identifying priority areas but are only effective if
accompanied with innovative decentralized governance. Specific management actions are
planned for each atoll and will be integrated into national policy.


DIFFERENT GROWTH STRATEGIES FOR THE CORAL SPECIES SETTLED ON
NEW MODEL MANUFACTURED OF SEMI-ARTIFICIAL SUBSTRATES, RED SEA,
EGYPT (Abstract ID: 28593 | Poster ID: 179)
Growth and development of recognized coral recruits settled on the artificial model
surface was recorded over two years at Hurghada, Red Sea. One soft and several hard
recruits were recorded on the models surface. Different strategies of recruit development were performed. Accordingly, month of first species observed, number of polyps,
species development with seasonal monitoring of the dimensional changes, seasonal
variation in percentage of area development and increase in circumference of each
species over the two years was carried out. This indicated a species specific pattern
of development that differs significantly among coral families. These differences in the
growth pattern of coral species are most probably related to the strategy used by each
of the species to achieve its maximum growth and establishment of the colony to the
substrate at the same time. Most common development pattern recorded follows the
polynomial type, which indicated that the growth in the colonies dose not depend on the
arrival of new recruits to the site but on the availability of certain parameters which may
include food, illumination and temperature. So in most cases the asexual reproduction
is the common type of reproduction until colonies reach certain size (or age) or develop
mature enough individuals that are able to produce gametes.


LONG TERM REEF HEALTH MONITORING (2004-2013) AT ABANG WATERS,
BATAM CITY, RIAU ISLANDS PROVINCE (Abstract ID: 27786)
Long term reef health that was expressed as coral live cover and others reef benthics
cover monitoring at Abang Waters, Batam City, Riau Islands Province. The aims of
monitoring observed, whether the reef benthic covers were changed on a temporal and
spatial scale. Reef Monitoring in 2013 is a nine (9) years period, since baseline on 2004
at 12 different sites. Reef health monitoring have used Line Intercept Transect (LIT)
method, with ten meter transect long and three (3) transects for representated , and they
were lied on 5-7 meter depth. Change of coral cover and others benthic on a temporal
and spatial scale was analyzed by one-way ANOVA with further tested by Tukey with
p=0.05. Result of monitoring shown that average of coral live cover was 50.71%, however live coral cover have been decrease compared in 2010 which their cover 68,62%.
On a temporal scale, the result of monitoring have been shown that significant changed
to several benthic cover included coral live cover Acoropora (p=0.04), Sponge (p=0.05)
and Coral Ruble (p=0.003), whereas on a spatial scale, the all monitoring sites were
experienced decrease in coral live cover. The environment factors were predicted by
sedimentation loading and sea temperature stress was indicated by coral bleaching event
in 2007 and 2010. The nine (9) years monitoring have been done which shown that
decreased live coral cover, however not changed reef health condition Key Words: reef
health, reef monitoring, coral cover, benthic cover, Abang Islands


HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN GENE HSP70 AS AN INDICATOR FOR DETERMINING
THERMAL STRESS RESPONSE IN STYLOPHORA PISTILLATA FROM GULF OF
SUEZ, RED SEA (Abstract ID: 28371)


The branching coral Stylophora pistillata is one of the most abundant hermatypic corals
along the coasts of the Red Sea. It has been used for many years as a model species
for coral biological studies. To examine thermal stress and any mutation would occur in
Stylophora pistillata, we identified full-length sequence of Hsp 70 in samples of control
and other samples after exposure to 26°C for 24h and 31°C for 72h. Relative quantification of gene expression level was measured for Hsp 70 in all thermal stressed colonies.
Molecular modeling of Hsp 70 protein was made based on the ATP bound open
conformation. After submission the sequence of Hsp 70 gene from Stylophora pistillata,
GenBank assigned accession KP330265 for this sequence. Gene expression increased
Molecular modeling demonstrates that even though many amino acid residues of Hsp
70 protein were mutated after exposure to heat stress, the resultant mutants did not lose
molecular interactions that might be necessary for protein stabilization and function.

DISTINCT BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES OCCUR ON CORALLINE ALGAE THAT
Coral larvae must undergo a metamorphosis and settlement process in order to succeed
in colony formation and contribute to reef growth. Crustose coralline algae (CCA) are
known for their capacity to induce a metamorphic/settlement response in corals. CCAs
vary in their capacity to induce these responses but the identity and role of their respective bacterial biofilms is not well understood. We set out to characterize the bacterial
community of CCA species with different inductive capacities. Acropora millepora coral
larvae were exposed to four different CCAs in multiple-choice assays. The bacterial
communities of each CCA species were characterized by pyrosequencing of variable
regions V1-V3 of the 16S rRNA gene. Two of the CCAs accounted for three quarters
of all settlement. Despite all four CCA species sharing some bacterial groups, we found
unique bacterial groups associated with the two species with the highest inductive
2

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

capacity . This study is the first to implicate roles for these novel bacterial groups in coral
settlement. We will discuss our results in terms of the identity of these groups and their
possible role in the inductive capacity of the CCA-bacterial community consortia.

Informed management in the face of rising anthropogenic pressure has become a
priority for the sustainability of coastal fisheries in the Coral Triangle. Depauperate
information on pelagic larval duration and behavior presents a particular challenge to
understanding the scale of movement in many target reef species, particularly at the
boundaries of species’ ranges. In such cases, genetic analyses can illuminate dispersal
patterns. Schooling, reef-associated caesionids are heavily impacted in regions with
high artisanal fishing pressure. We collected tissue samples of Caesio cuning from five
localities in the apex of the species’ distribution to examine genetic connectivity along
~2000km of the Kuroshio Current from the Philippines to the northern extent of the
species range in the Ryukyu Islands. Individual samples were barcoded and genotyped
via RAD tags and the subsampled genomes were mined for a panel of SNPs to examine
(1) levels and direction of gene flow between and among sites in the Philippines and
Japan and (2) whether significant decreases in effective population size (Ne) at the limits
of the species range can be detected. Characterizing genetic signatures from sites proximal to strong ocean currents and from the core to the periphery of the species range
to inform optimal management strategy for this species.


THE IMPACT OF PHILIPPINE MPA MANAGEMENT EFFORT ON HUMAN AND
SOCIAL CAPITAL AND VICE VERSA: ASSIGNING NON-USE VALUES TO REEFS
BEYOND ECONOMIC BENEFITS (Abstract ID: 29294)
Evidence strongly suggests that marine protected areas (MPAs) have the potential to
provide ecological and economic benefits while balancing the trade-offs that come with
stricter fisheries management measures. However, the effect of MPAs on social and human capital and MPAs’ other non-use values in the Philippines has only been minimally
explored. This study aims to determine and measure the impact of MPA management
efforts on these benefits at the Philippine municipal level. Relying on contingent valuation techniques in the absence of complete data on the impact of MPA management on
natural capital, this research aims to show the value that Philippine coastal society has
affixed unto reefs beyond their monetary and economic benefits. Using the Management Effectiveness Assessment Tool (MEAT) and the newly developed Socio-Economic
Assessment Tool (SEAT), the researchers compiled data on MPA management effort
(using the MEAT) and socio-economic benefits derived from the MPA (using the SEAT)
from focused group discussions with MPA managers. Taking data from 17 MPAs, it is
evident that social and human capital is high and well-distributed among stakeholder
communities along the coast; however, based on this study, this impact cannot be
directly attributed to management effort as of yet. Our research suggests some revisions
some parameters to consider when assigning value to Philippine coral reefs to improve
the social acceptability of protected areas.


COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF FORAGING BEHAVIOR REVEALS HIGH FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY AMONG CARIBBEAN PARROTFISHES (Abstract ID: 30085)
Herbivorous fish and sea urchins play a critical role in the resilience of coral reefs by
limiting harmful algae. The principal herbivores on many reefs are a diverse group of
space for coral recruitment, bioerosion, the removal of macroalgae, etc.), and which
have complementary impacts on benthic communities. Classifying herbivorous fishes
into distinct functional groups based on their predicted impacts on reef ecosystems can
inform resilience-based management strategies. We analyzed the behavior, diets, and bite
mechanics of parrotfishes in the Florida Keys to document ecological diversity among
the dominant herbivores on many Caribbean reefs, and to classify these species into
functional groups. We found that in contrast to Pacific reefs, where most parrotfishes are
categorized as scrapers and excavators, parrotfishes on Caribbean reefs include representatives of four major herbivore functional groups: scrapers, excavators, macroalgae
browsers, and grazers. While fishes in different functional groups clearly have different
impacts on benthic communities, we also found that species in the same functional
group tended to select different habitats, feed from different substrates, and forage over
different spatial scales, suggesting high levels of complementarity within functional
groups, and implying that most species play a unique role in the ecosystem. By identifying key functional differences among parrotfishes, our results can inform management of
Caribbean reef ecosystems.

au


PUTTING THE SUCCESS OF BIOERODING SPONGES ON FUTURE REEFS INTO
PERSPECTIVE: ENHANCED BIOEROSION VERSUS PHYSIOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS OF CLIONA ORIENTALIS (Abstract ID: 27934)
Excavating sponges –which are one of the major groups of bioeroders on the reef–
belong to the perceived winners under future climate scenarios. Ocean warming and
acidification have been shown to boost their bioerosion capacity, but it remains unclear
whether there are adverse physiological effects of these stressors that may counteract
the enhanced bioerosion on the long run. We exposed the aggressive photosymbiotic
bioeroder Cliona orientalis from the Great Barrier Reef to a prolonged temperature and
acidity rise (according to the IPCC predictions for end of the century summer conditions
under “business-as-usual” CO2 emissions). Subsequently we monitored the physiological response of the sponge, focusing on changes to its carbon budget and bioerosion
efficiency. Temperature stress resulted in extensive bleaching and occasional mortality,
suggesting a strong dependence of the sponge on its zooxanthellate symbiont. Increased
acidity alone did not have a profound effect on the sponge bioerosion or survival rates.
When combined, these stressors led to a significant reduction in the energetic budget of
the sponge, synergistically reducing rather than enhancing bioerosion rates. Overall this
study points towards an impaired physiology of the sponge under the changed conditions, leading to the hypothesis that although Cliona orientalis may be able to survive
future summers, its growth and bioerosion capacity will be substantially diminished.

CAN CLIMATE ADAPTATION PORTFOLIOS MITIGATE RISK IN THE FACE OF
UNCERTAIN IMPACTS OF GLOBAL CHANGE? (Abstract ID: 28746)
Marine conservation and management often focus on the preservation of ‘pristine’ areas
in hopes that these areas will be robust to disturbance and repopulate degraded sites.
However, as climate change occurs, the utility of any given site may shift tremendously
such that now ‘pristine’ sites morph into ecological or evolutionary sinks. Given our
poor capacity to anticipate the future, what is the best strategy for enabling successful
coral reef adaptation to global change? One possible solution is constructing reserve
portfolios that protect a diversity of coral species and provide raw evolutionary material
across space. Such a portfolio of reserves may have the highest likelihood of capturing
key sites and promoting geographic range shifts, physiological acclimatization, and
adaptation via natural selection. We report a synthesis of coral traits a graphically outline
a meta-community model that will quantify the costs and benefits of building reef
adaptation portfolios relative to other conservation approaches, including the preservation of pristine locations. We suggest that diverse conservation portfolios are the key to
promoting adaptation in the face of the irreducible uncertainties of global change. By
designing management actions to enable billions of match-mismatch tests, nature can
draw from these diverse portfolios to pick the winners of ecological reorganization and
evolutionary adaptation.


EXAMINING EDGE EFFECTS ALONG THE KUROSHIO CURRENT IN A SCHOOLING REEF PLANKTIVORE (Abstract ID: 29549)


ECOSYSTEM APPROACH TO FISHERIES ASSESSMENT FOR A CORAL REEFS
BASED MARINE CONSERVATION AREA IN TROPICAL SPHERE (Abstract ID:

3

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

29756)


Ecosystem approach to fisheries management (EAFM) has been suggested as the
better option for managing the fisheries in Indonesia since the deliberation of Coral
Triangle Initiative in which Indonesia is considered as the member of the initiative. Since
that, EAFM in Indonesia has been improving from developing EAFM indicators for
ecosystem approach to fisheries assessment (EAFA) methodology to the implementation of EAFM in a number of fisheries units, including in the MPA-based fisheries unit
contributes to the experience of assessing EAFM Indicators using flag model based
methodology. Results of the assessment show that relatively good condition has been
achieved for the EAFM domain of fisheries resources, habitat, and economics, while for
the fishing technology, social and institutional domain, the results are moderately good. A

INCORPORATING ECOSYSTEM SERVICES VALUES IN RESILIENCE-BASED
MANAGEMENT: THE CASE STUDY OF A REMOTE INDIAN OCEAN ATOLL
(Abstract ID: 29349)
Understanding the values of ecosystem services and integrating them into spatial
conservation plans can allow policy-makers and managers to make decisions about
use of resources. Ecosystem services provide a key link between ecological resilience,
which supports ecosystem services, and social resilience, which is supported by
ecosystem services. Managing marine areas for ecosystem services can thus promote
socio-ecological resilience. However, measuring the values of ecosystem services and
integrating this information into spatial plans remains challenging due to the complex
nature of ecosystems and the services that they provide to people, as well as the paucity
of data sets. In this study of the remote North Ari atoll in the Maldives, we collected
ecological and social data and analyzed them to determine the total economic value of
ecosystem services such as tourism and reef fisheries. A net present value analysis was
undertaken in order to make the economic case for coral reef management. It was found
that depending on the scenario, investments in developing and running managed areas
yielded benefits of 15.8 – 75.7 million US$ annually for the atoll economy, depending
on the discount rate used and the level of investment made in coral reef management.
Ecosystem services were also mapped, and areas of high intensity of ecosystem services were identified. Recommendations were made for coral reef management in order
to gain maximum benefits from ecosystem services and to promote socio-ecological
resilience in North Ari Atoll.



USING CORAL REEF SCIENCE IN MSP TO ACHIEVE PERFORMANCE-BASED
ZONING (Abstract ID: 29434)

ECOLOGY OF A TISSUE LOSS DISEASE OUTBREAK IN ACROPORIDS ON THE
REEFS OF PALMYRA ATOLL, LINE ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 28935)

Marine spatial planning is being undertaken in many coral reef areas of the world, usually with the intent to maximize blue growth and promote integrated marine management. One way to ensure conservation of coral reefs are front and center in marine
spatial plans and management is to use coral reef ecology and resilience science to
design zoning plans that protect what is ecologically most important, while allowing sustainable use. Performance-based zoning allows the setting of very specific conservation
and management objectives, and the implementation of management regimes within
each zone to move toward achieving those objectives. Management must be designed so
that scientific monitoring allows the assessment of performance, considering both ecological/environmental outcomes and social outcomes. Performance based zoning is not
cast in stone but can be dynamic and should be regularly amended and updated in true
adaptive management fashion. Geographically large scale MSP and zoning, especially
that which integrates planning across the watershed and coastal landscape, can help to
achieve true ecosystem-based management and will ensure that conservation does not
take a back seat to economic development.

Disease outbreaks are a global problem on coral reefs including reefs in remote regions.
Before we can predict and respond to disease events we must first understand the
ecology and pathogenesis of these diseases. In 2011, we documented an outbreak of
an acute tissue loss disease on acroporids in the remote region of Palmyra Atoll, Line
Islands. Disease prevalence averaged 1.5% on the reef with surveys in prior years finding no signs of disease. Disease prevalence was similar the following year (2012) but
disease progression had changed from predominantly acute tissue loss lesions (>5cm
bare skeleton) to chronic tissue loss lesions (<5cm bare skeleton). The disease was still
present in 2014 (10.4% prevalence) with both chronic and acute tissue loss lesions on
corals. Aquaria studies showed the disease was transmissible through direct and indirect
contact. Thirty-four tagged infected colonies followed for one year all had progressive
tissue loss (avg. 42% loss) with a case fatality rate of 55.9%. Four of the remaining live
colonies had signs of chronic tissue loss and the other 11 colonies showed no signs of
disease. Treatment of lesions with a double band of marine epoxy, mixed with chlorine
powder, was found to delay but not stop the disease. Histology revealed necrosis with a
minority of colonies showing wound repair suggesting an ongoing active process. The
bacterium Vibrio coralliilyticus strain OCN014 was isolated from diseased coral and was
identified as a potential etiological agent based on laboratory infection trials.



MARINE HABITAT CONSERVATION THROUGH SOCIAL MARKETING CAMPAIGN IN PAPUA, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 30158 | Poster ID: 658)
Community support in the management of Marine Protected Area (MPA) management
is a key for success. Social marketing through Pride campaign program has been implemented in 21 MPAs in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Timor Leste with the total area 171,112
ha. . The campaigns were to support behavior change of fishers to comply with the implementation of No Take Zone (NTZ) of the MPA to prevent the degradation of marine
resources and promote sustainable fisheries, food security and biodiversity conservation.
After two years of the program, social marketing campaigns succeeded in increasing
the average levels of Knowledge, Attitude, Interpersonal Communication and Behavior
Change across the campaign sites. The campaigns developed an overarching hypothesis
of impact that captured the knowledge, attitude and behavior changes needed to reduce
threats and achieve conservation results. These included increasing knowledge and conversations about the location and benefits of the protected area, reducing violations of
the NTZ and stabilizing fish biomass and hard coral cover. The existence of NTZ could
ensure food security for the people in the greater area. This paper will show the process
and success story of the social marketing campaign to conserve marine habitat.

ECOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF HIGH LATITUDE CORAL COMMUNITIES IN
JAPAN UNDER PRESENT AND FUTURE CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 29344)
Tropical corals are so threatened by climate change that high latitude marginal coral
communities may be their last refuge. However, the future of these communities is
still uncertain. We are assessing the future of high latitude coral communities and their
ecosystems through a program that integrates monitoring, field and laboratory experiments and the use of volcanic CO2 seeps as a natural analogue for ocean acidification.
We have studied 20 coral species off Izu, Japan (35°N). The lowest annual temperature
(~12°C) often causes bleaching and favors overgrowth by macroalgae. Field incubations of two dominant species, Porites heronensis and Alveopora japonica, have shown
the adverse effects of low temperatures on their physiology. We have found that the two
increase in temperature would favor its growth. We are now comparing the performance


4

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

mance indicators to focus on impact evaluation methods that allow us to document and
explain variation in the ecological impacts of MPAs. The recent establishment of an
MPA network in the highly bio-diverse Bird’s Head Seascape (BHS) in West Papua, Indonesia, represents an opportunity to robustly document the ecological impacts of MPAs,
using state-of-the-art impact evaluation techniques. Building on an existing monitoring
program in the BHS, we adopt a quasi-experimental design that enables causal inference
through the explicit consideration of the counterfactual outcome, thus controlling for
observable bias. This approach is critical to help disentangle MPA impacts from broader
changes affecting the condition of BHS coral reefs. Ecological baseline and repeat data
(every 3-4 years) was collected at seven MPAs at over 200 sites within different management zones and in over 50 sites outside of MPAs. Results indicate MPA ecological
impacts vary in both magnitude and direction across indicators and MPAs. Using this
novel approach to isolate MPA impacts provides further insights into the characteristics
of the MPAs that influence ecological outcomes and subsequently facilitates MPA design
to optimize conservation targets.

of corals and macroalgae at Shimoda (35°N, 12-26°C, low CO2), Shikine (35°N, 14-28°C,
low CO2) and a CO2 seep off Shikine (14-28°C, high CO2) to determine the combined
effects of global warming and ocean acidification at the boundary between kelp forests
and tropical coral communities.

ELEVATED PCO2 SUPPRESSES THE INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE OF THE
CORAL ACROPORA MILLEPORA TO LPS CHALLENGE (Abstract ID: 28103)
Continued decline of corals reefs globally have been associated with increased anthropogenic stress. However the effect of these direct environmental stressors on the coral
immune response is poorly understood though may promote disease due to an already
compromised system. Evidence from mammals and Drosophila show that environmental
stressful conditions impairs the immune response of the animal and that subsequent
pathogen challenge causes increased mortality through disease processes. For corals
little is understood on the influence of elevated pCO2 on the animal’s immune system
and how subsequent additional challenges may impact coral health. Here we investigate
the transcriptomic response of the coral Acropora millepora to the defined immunogen LPS, and the effects that pre-exposing corals to high pCO2 conditions had on this
response. Results from this study revealed that the coral implements key components
of the vertebrate innate immune system as a response to an immune challenge. Interestingly, the LPS-induced response was impaired in corals exposed to high pCO2 conditions,
with suppression of crucial elements of the innate immunity including Toll-like receptors
(TLR), tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) and associate members observed. These
results support the hypothesis that the innate immune response in corals might be
compromise under future ocean acidification conditions.


THE TEMPERATE CORAL OCULINA ARBUSCULA EXHIBITS A HETEROTROPHIC RESCUE EFFECT TO TEMPERATURE STRESS (Abstract ID: 28217)
Anthropogenic increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration have caused
global average sea surface temperature to increase by approximately 0.11°C per
decade between 1971 and 2010―a trend projected to continue through the 21st century.
Research has demonstrated that increased SSTs compromise the coral holobiont
(cnidarian host and symbiotic algae) by reducing host calcification and symbiont density.
However, we are only beginning to understand the role of heterotrophy in the response
of the coral holobiont to elevated temperature, particularly for temperate corals. Here,
we conducted two independent experiments to investigate the influence of heterotrophy
on the response of the temperate scleractinian coral Oculina arbuscula to thermal stress.
treatments (zero, low, moderate, and high concentrations of Artemia sp. nauplii) at two
temperatures (average annual SST (20°C) and average summer temperature (28°C) for
the period 2005-2012) to quantify the effects of heterotrophy on skeletal growth and
symbiont density. Results suggest that heterotrophy produced a rescue effect for colonies
exposed to higher temperatures, mediating reduced skeletal growth and symbiont
density observed for unfed corals reared at the same high temperatures. Our study
highlights the importance of heterotrophy in maintaining coral holobiont fitness under
thermal stress and has potential implications for the interpretation of coral thermal
stress response to climate change.


CORAL REEFS OF THE WESTERN INDIAN OCEAN – STATUS AND BLEACHING
IN 2016 (Abstract ID: 29179 | Poster ID: 607)
The Western Indian Ocean contains under 5% of the world’s coral reefs, but is hypothesized to contain the second hotspot of coral reef biodiversity globally. These coral
reef ecosystems underpin the economies of the countries in the region, particularly
fisheries and tourism sectors, and provide livelihood opportunities and income for local
coral bleaching, are all increasing exponentially with regional human population growth
and development. Concurrent with the GCRMN reporting on reef status for the region
being finalized in 2016, the region is going through what has been dubbed the “3rd global
coral bleaching event”. Having been the region that suffered the most from the 1st global
event in 1997-98, where mortality of 30-50% of corals was widespread, there is grave
concern that 2016 may be as severe or worse. The reporting of reef status will compile
summary data from participating monitoring programmes across the 10 countries of
the region, following the model of the Caribbean GCRMN report published in 2014, and
implementing a DPSIR approach. In terms of monitoring effort, the report emphasizes
decreasing resources dedicated to monitoring, with most countries of the region posting
declining monitoring from 2009 to 2015. The results of improved regional coordination
and commitment of national teams through a coral bleaching response plan will be
highlighted in the presentation, along with the levels of bleaching and their impact on
overall reef status in 2016.


FROM THE MICROBIAL SOUP AND THE SLIPPERY SLOPE TO SLIME, TO A
NEW NORMAL FOR REEF CORALS (Abstract ID: 28330)
Climate change has contributed to worldwide increases in the frequency and severity of
mass coral bleaching events and coral disease outbreaks. In recent years research into
the coral microbiome has been directed at understanding the microbial contribution to
coral death, disease and reef-wide decline. However it is the corals on reefs of today,
and those that survive bleaching events, that will be integral to reefs of the future, under
altered environmental regimes. The capacity to sustain a normal or ‘healthy’ microbial
state during bleaching is likely to be a vital factor in coral recovery, survival, disease
prevention and adaptation. Here we show that near future climate conditions result in
an altered microbial state for corals that survive the breakdown of their algal symbiosis.
But where previous research has linked a pathogenic or diseased microbial state to coral
mortality from bleaching, here we show that non-pathogenic alterations to micro biome
occur in corals that survive bleaching events (synonymous to an altered or ‘dysbiotic’,
rather than symbiotic, state). The microbial state of corals surviving near future climate
stressors is likely to have long-term implications to coral reef ecosystems.



SHORT-TERM ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS IN THE BIRD’S HEAD SEASCAPE MPA
NETWORK (Abstract ID: 28462)
Marine conservation strategies often allocate considerable resources towards the
establishment and management of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) with the expectation
they will provide fisheries as well as biodiversity benefits. The “reserve effect” has been
demonstrated repeatedly, though this is not universal. Here, we move beyond perfor-

5

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

the calcification response of a coral reef flat to alkalinity addition to test whether net calcification increases when ocean chemistry is restored closer to pre-industrial conditions.
We used sodium hydroxide to increase the total alkalinity of seawater flowing over a reef
flat, with the aim of increasing carbonate ion concentrations and aragonite saturation
to values expected under pre-industrial atmospheric pCO2 levels. We developed a dual
tracer regression method to estimate alkalinity uptake (calcification) in response to alkalinity enrichment. This approach uses the change in ratios between a non-conservative
tracer (alkalinity) and a conservative tracer (a non-reactive dye) to quantify the fraction
of added alkalinity taken up by the reef. We estimate that the reef community took up
17.3% ± 2.3% of the added alkalinity, inferring a 6.9 ± 0.9% increase in net calcification.
In providing results from the first seawater chemistry manipulation experiment of a
natural coral reef community, we provide evidence that net community calcification is
depressed compared to values expected for pre-industrial conditions, indicating that OA
may already be impairing coral reef growth.

gov

THE GREAT BARRIER REEF IS AT RISK OF LOSING THERMAL TOLERANCE
(Abstract ID: 29279)
Coral bleaching events threaten the sustainability of the Great Barrier Reef (GBR).
Here we show that bleaching events of the past three decades have been mitigated by
induced thermal tolerance of reef-building corals and this protective mechanism is likely
to be lost under near-future climate change scenarios. We show that 75% of past thermal
stress events have been characterized a temperature trajectory that subjects corals to
a protective, sub-bleaching stress, prior to reaching temperatures that cause bleaching.
Such conditions confer thermal tolerance, decreasing coral cell mortality and symbiont
loss during bleaching by over 50%. Importantly, we find that near-future temperature
increases of as little as 0.5 °C result in this protective mechanism being lost, which may



RAPID AND HIGH PRECISION MEASUREMENT OF UREA USING HIGH TEMPERATURE: SIGNIFICANCE IN COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 29109)
Urea is an unstable organic nitrogenous compound present in coastal environment derived from the excretion of some aquatic organisms, including human being. Recently it
was recognized the importance of urea in nitrogen cycle since the discovery of implication of diatoms in the urea cycling. Therefore, accurate measurement of dissolved urea
is required in coastal ecosystems. Production, consumption and degradation of urea
are not well understood because of a lack of the appropriate measurement techniques.
Therefore, we modified the conventional method from a room temperature to a high
temperature system for measuring dissolved urea. Conventional method is based on the
formation of colored product when urea reacts with diacetylmonoxime in sulfuric acid
solution. High temperature (69°C) with single mix color developing reagent (COLDER)
is our main modification. This method can determine about 10-12% more dissolved
urea in different coastal environments (0.65-0.72 μM urea-N in coral reef, 0.49-0.58 μM
urea-N in seagrass and 1.09-2.28 μM urea-N in mangrove) with 70 times faster measurement speed compared to room temperature procedures. Our results suggest that, high
temperature procedure is more suitable, rapid and time saving than room temperature
procedure with high precision (SD=0.001,CV=1.2%), high recovery (94-99%) and low
detection limit (0.03 μM urea-N). Our method may provide an appropriate indication of
the status of urea in nitrogen cycle in coastal communities.

UNDERSTANDING TRAJECTORIES OF RECOVERY AND DECLINE OF LAKSHADWEEP REEFS IN THE WAKE OF REPEATED CLIMATE DISTURBANCES
AND THE CONSEQUENCES FOR FISH COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 28686)
As climate disturbances increasingly come to define the ecology of tropical reefs,
understanding the trajectories that systems take in the wake of these events becomes
critical to managing and enhancing their buffer capacity. We tracked changes in benthic
cover and fish composition on reefs across the Lakshadweep Archipelago, characterised
by low fishing and oligotrophic waters. In the wake of the 1998 bleaching, these reefs
showed qualitatively different responses, driven mostly by storm exposure and depth.
Stable reefs (typically deeper, protected sites) were largely resistant to bleaching and
did not show major changes in coral cover. In contrast, Dynamic reefs (typically shallow, storm exposed sites) had coral compositions dominated by bleaching susceptible
species but with very rapid rates of recovery linked to high recruitment of fast-growing
competitive coral. Finally Degrading reefs (typically shallow, storm-protected sites) were
characterised by bleaching susceptible species but with low post-disturbance recruitment and survival of coral. These trajectories in benthic cover had major consequences
for several functionally important species of benthic, long-lived fish including groupers
and corallivore butterflyfish that could only survive in stable reefs. Our results highlight
that even in locations with relatively low fishing pressure, the imprint of climate change
is changing basic ecosystem dynamics in large and unexpected ways.



DISAPPEARING CORAL CAYS IN SOLOMON ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 27884)

CATALYSING MANAGEMENT OF MARINE RESOURCES THROUGH A FISHER’S
ELECTRONIC REGISTRY AND LICENSING SYSTEM (Abstract ID: 28018 | Poster
ID: 566)

Coral reefs and the ecosystem services they provide are of vital importance to societies yet are one of the most vulnerable ecosystems to the novel pressures arising from
the ‘super wicked problem’ of contemporary global change. Sea-level rise has been
predicted to cause widespread erosion and inundation on some of the low-lying coral
cays sitting on top of reefs. However, there is limited understanding on exactly what type
of islands are the most vulnerable and the timing and rate of changes. Here, we present
the first analysis of coral sand cay dynamics from a sea-level rise hotspot in Solomon
Islands. Using time series aerial and satellite imagery from 1947 to 2014 of 33 islands,
along with historical insight from local knowledge, we have identified five vegetated reef
islands that have vanished over this time period and a further six islands experiencing
severe shoreline recession. Shoreline recession at two sites has destroyed villages that
have existed since at least 1935, leading to community relocations. The large range of
erosion severity on the islands in this study highlights the critical need to understand the
complex interplay between the projected accelerating sea-level rise, spatial and temporal
changes in climate drivers such as wave-driven processes and local tectonics, to guide
future adaptation planning and minimise social impacts.

Governance on artisanal fishing effort is often a challenging task partly due to the inherent sparsity of these small-scale fishers, which frequently poses significant logistical constrains for the authorities. The fisher’s electronic registry and licensing system built for the
Department of Fisheries in Honduras is a web-based, low cost data handling system that
is easy to use with a portable laptop and printer, efficiently emitting physical licenses that
deliver a sense of direct participation to fishers. Through the progressive development of
this practical, affordable and intuitive tool the authorities of coastal-marine resources are
now generating opportune and accurate information on the degree and the distribution
of the once underestimated artisanal fishing effort. The central database is also providing
the basis for complementary fisheries management tools such as a catch data monitoring system and a participatory environmental crime watch web service.



REVERSAL OF OCEAN ACIDIFICATION ENHANCES NET CORAL REEF CALCIFICATION (Abstract ID: 28392)

LONG-TERM CORAL COMMUNITY STABILITY IN A DISTURBED MARGINAL
REEF IN KUWAIT (Abstract ID: 27921)

Ocean acidification (OA) is projected to shift reefs from a state of net accretion to one
of net dissolution this century. While retrospective studies show large-scale declines in
coral calcification over the last decades, determining the relative contribution of OA to

Coral reefs in Kuwait occur at high latitude (29 N) and in extreme environmental condi-

6

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

mented to pave the way to a Sustainable Philippine Archipelagic Development Agenda.

tions (SST range: 13 to 32 C, annually), and have been subject to chronic anthropogenic
pressure in recent decades (recurrent bleaching, oil spills, chronic recreational anchoring
and diving impacts). We intensively surveyed coral communities at six sites around
Kubbar Island in 2015 and compared these to quantitative survey results collected at
the same sites 31 years earlier (1984) as well as results from several sites resurveyed a
decade ago (2003) in order to characterize changes in coral community structure in this
marginal reef environment. Mean coral cover was 25% in 2015 compared with 34% in
1984, but declines in coral cover were significant at only one site. The decline in coral
cover at this single site was mainly due to a >80% loss of formerly dominant Acropora,
and a concomitant shift towards a lower cover community dominated by massives. A
total of 13 coral genera were observed across sites, comparable to the 12 observed
in 1984 and the 13 observed in 2003. Urchins have historically been considered an
important bioeroder on Kuwait reefs, reaching densities of up to 100 m-2. Echinometra
mathaei density averaged 9.7 urchins m-2 in 2015, far lower than the 62 urchins m-2 observed in the 1980s, suggesting that earlier observations represented a bloom following
bleaching that occurred in the early 1980s. Overall, the results of this study show a high
degree of long term stability in coral community structure in the marginal and heavily
disturbed environment of northern Kuwait.


DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF CO2 AND WARMING ON PREDATOR-PREY INTERACTIONS IN CORAL REEF FISH (Abstract ID: 27925)
Ocean acidification and warming, driven by anthropogenic CO2 emissions, are considered to be among the greatest threats facing marine organisms affecting physiology
and behaviour in fishes. We tested the independent and interactive effects of short-term
elevated CO2 and temperature exposure on the predator-prey interactions of common
pairs of coral reef fishes (Pseudochromis and Pomacentridae) as well as the effect of
elevated CO2 exposure on the escape responses of juvenile fish and whether such effects are altered by transgenerational acclimation. We found predator success increased
following predator and prey exposure to elevated CO2 and temperature. Overall, high
temperature had an overwhelming negative effect on the escape behaviour of the prey
compared to the independent effect of CO2 or the combined exposure to elevated CO2
and temperature. We observed little influence of CO2 on the behaviour of the predator,
suggesting that attack behaviour was robust to this environmental change. Finally we
found that elevated CO2 negatively affected the reactivity and locomotor performance
of juvenile fish, but transgenerational acclimation reduced these effects. These are the
first studies to address how the kinematics at the basis of predator-prey interactions
may change in response to independent and concurrent exposure to elevated CO2 and
temperature, and whether there is any potential for acclimation to occur.

Azad University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran
University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran

DO DISEASES THREATEN THE CORAL REEFS OF KISH ISLAND, PERSIAN
GULF? (Abstract ID: 29300 | Poster ID: 162)


Corals in the Persian Gulf exist in a harsh environment with extreme temperature and
salinity fluctuations. Understanding the health of these hardy Gulf corals may prove useful for predicting the survival of other corals facing the impacts of global climate change.
In this study, the health state of corals were surveyed along belt transects at four sites
on the east side of Kish Island, Iran. Kish Island is located in the northern part of the
Persian Gulf and is a favorite tourist spot. Within the four sites surveyed, a total of 474
colonies were found belonging to 13 coral genera. The dominant corals were Acropora
(38% of the coral colonies), Porites (24.1%), and Favia/Favites (23%). Signs of excessive sedimentation occurred on all corals except acroporids and physical damage was
found on 17% of the corals. Three tissue loss diseases (avg. prevalence±SE) were found
in Porites including Porites multifocal tissue loss (8±2.3%), Porites chronic tissue loss
(1±1%) and a Porites tissue loss disease, which had distinct peeling tissue at the lesion
edge with a green exposed coral skeleton (7.25±3.7%). Another tissue loss disease, Favia
subacute tissue loss, was also recorded (1±1%) but no signs of disease were observed
on any of the other coral. Other coral lesions included pink discoloration in Porites
associated with algae invasion or boring organisms, sponge overgrowth on Porites and
mucus sheathing on Favia/Favites. The Gulf region is understudied and this represents
one of the first surveys of coral health and disease on these reefs.

FISHING DOWN NUTRIENTS: SELECTIVE HARVEST REDUCES NUTRIENT
CAPACITY IN CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 29597)
Overfishing is a major driver of global coral reef declines and is associated with reduce
biodiversity within these ecosystems. Overwhelming evidence demonstrates that biological diversity is a primary driver of ecosystem function, providing important motivation
for conservation efforts. Yet while it is clear that biodiversity loss can reduce ecosystem
functioning, there are many other underlying drivers by which humans exact changes to
ecological communities. Here we show that although species richness is a good predictor of ecosystem function in highly diverse coral reef ecosystems, it is not a primary
driver of ecosystem function loss in the context of one of the greatest threats to marine
biodiversity (over-fishing). We modeled five nutrient processes of storage and supply,
herein “nutrient capacity”, and multifunctionality onto 143 species of coral reef fishes
across 110 coral reef fish communities, ranging from heavily fished to protected. We
found that despite no substantial changes in the number of species within a community,
fishing reduced ecosystem functioning by nearly half. Instead the primary driver of
reduced ecosystem function was changes in trophic structure of the communities due to
targeted fishing of select species. There is a clear need to protect against species loss, but
if a primary goal is to maintain high levels of ecosystem function, focusing conservation
efforts on maintaining trophic structure and community size structure is critical.

com


ACCELERATING SCALING UP INITIATIVES TOWARDS SUSTAINING CORAL
REEFS IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29939 | Poster ID: 570)

CORALS: A RESPONSE TO COMPENSATE FOR OCEAN ACIDIFICATION EFFECTS (Abstract ID: 29293)

The movement towards more effective coral reef conservation in the Philippines has
shown considerable progress. Albeit, concerns persist as to whether the progress so far
are enough to be able to catch up with the prevailing threats to coral reefs. Accelerated efforts are needed to improve the effectiveness of Marine Protected Areas (MPA)
and scaling up efforts such as through MPA networks and local government alliances.
We show that scaling up efforts can help achieve its target within our lifetime through
multilevel governance. Efforts like the Marine Protected Areas (MPA) Support Network
and other coordinated partnerships in Marine Key Biodiversity Areas (MKBA) are crucial.
Using ecological connectedness, critical habitats and trigger species, envelope the priority
areas of local and subnational governance initiatives. Protecting 10% of coral reefs has
been projected to take a while, despite the significant increase in the size and rate of effective management. Areas needing urgent gap filling to meet future challenges are in the
West Philippine Sea and the North Philippine Sea. Initial decades of accelerated marine
conservation suggest improved effectiveness with national programs linked to local efforts
and also to broader geographic arenas. National government agencies in collaboration
with non-government organizations have made headway in finding synergies in marine
biodiversity conservation. An overarching archipelagic framework needs to be imple-

We acclimated multiple sub-colonies of four genotypes of massive Porites spp. corals at
25°C and 2 seawater pCO2 concentrations representing the present day (400 ppm) and
future atmospheric conditions (750 ppm) for > 5 months. At the end of the acclimation, calcification rates were significantly reduced (typically by 30-60%) in three of the
genotypes in the high seawater pCO2 but were unaffected in one genotype. We analysed
the boron isotopic composition of the skeleton deposited after the acclimation period to
estimate the pH of the extracellular fluid used for calcification. Corals actively increase
the pH of the calcification fluid above that of ambient seawater, increasing the proportion of dissolved inorganic carbon present as CO32- at the calcification site and yielding
high aragonite saturation states, favourable for the precipitation of the skeleton. All
corals at high seawater pCO2 upregulated calcification fluid pH more than their lower
pCO2 counterparts thereby partially offsetting the reduction in seawater pH associated
with high seawater pCO2. At 750 ppm CO2, two of the genotypes attained the same
calcification fluid pH observed at 400 ppm. We observed a strong correlation between
calcification fluid pH and coral calcification rate. Our data show that some massive

7

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

(Abstract ID: 28162)

Porites corals are able to adapt to high seawater pCO2 by upregulating calcification fluid
pH to maintain the high calcifying fluid pH required for rapid calcification. We do not
know the energetic cost of this adaptation but it persists beyond several months.

Climate change is expected alter not only the general climate patterns but also seasonal
variability, with direct and indirect effects on species and ecosystems. Marine protected
areas (MPAs) are known to rebuild fish stocks, increase local biodiversity and strengthen
ecosystem functions. However, the extent to which they can sustain the full diversity
of ecosystem services in a changing climate is still unclear. Here, we investigate the
interactive effects of MPAs and monsoon seasonality on seagrass associated fish communities. We carried out a field survey in two marine protected areas (MPAs, no-take
zones) and two non-protected (fished) sites around Zanzibar (Tanzania) during three
monsoon seasons in 2014-2015. Fish and seagrass community surveys were conducted
in replicated transects. Since seagrass cover may vary between seasons, which in turn
could affect the associated fish community, we used path analysis to discern whether
seasonality affects fish communities directly, or indirectly through effects on the seagrass
beds. Within MPAs, we found no direct or indirect effects of seasonality on seagrass
fish. In fished areas, there was both a direct effect on juvenile, sub-adult, and adult fish
densities; and an indirect effect (mediated by seagrass cover) on total and sub-adult fish
densities. Despite the low level of replication (two MPAs), our findings suggest that well
enforced MPAs could play an important role in buffering some of the direct and indirect
effects of future climate variations on fish communities, and thus in the maintenance of
ecosystem services.



HIGHER MORTALITY BUT INCREASED GROWTH RATES OF CORAL ON IMPACTED REEFS AT JEDDAH, SAUDI RED SEA (Abstract ID: 29082 | Poster ID: 103)
ABSTRACT The coast of Saudi Arabia contains many of the best developed fringing
reefs in the Red Sea. However, coral communities on reefs closest to central Jeddah
has been badly affected by a wide range of impacts including extensive coastal infilling,
discharge of untreated as well as treated sewage, unregulated fishing, coral bleaching and
disease, and outbreaks of Crown-of-thorns starfish. Coral growth has been widely used
as a proxy for reef health and, to inform measures intended to improve environmental
conditions, we used an experimental approach to assess which of these impacts had
been most critical. Coral fragments of two species (Acropora hemprichi and Pocillopora
verrucosa) were cultured in mid-water suspension (so as to minimise the impact of
benthic predators and sediment deposition) at 6 different sites located north and south
of Jeddah. Survivorship and growth rates were monitored as well as chemical and
physical parameters and the associated bacterial biota. Results revealed that the mean
rate of coral growth was actually higher at some of the impacted sites, especially those
closest to sources of domestic and municipal sewage at which nutrient levels were found
to be elevated. However, coral mortality was also higher at these same sites and coral
cover on adjacent reefs lower. The differences in survivorship between sites may reflect
reduced health of coral fragments, higher rates of growth of competitive turf algae,
reduced rates of grazing by herbivorous fishes and changes in associated bacterial fauna
at the sites most subject to impact.

LARVAL FISH DISPERSAL IN A CORAL REEF SEASCAPE (Abstract ID: 28238)
Larval dispersal is a critical yet enigmatic process in the persistence and productivity of
marine fish metapopulations. We quantified larval dispersal among 8 subpopulations of
clownfish (Amphiprion percula) and butterflyfish (Chaetodon vagabundus) in a network
of marine reserves spaced between 10 and 120km apart across a ~10,000km2 seascape
in Papua New Guinea. Observed dispersal distances matched well with a modeled
and 95% of recruitment occurring within 30-45km of the source. The observed mean
kernel declining only gradually from spawning locations. Our study showed that dispersal
can be empirically measured on a spatial scale sufficient to parameterize spatially-explicit models and evaluate the design and performance of networks of marine reserves.


TROPICAL DEAD ZONES AND THE COLLAPSE OF CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID:
29618)

FROM LEAF NETS TO ARBALETES - BLENDING TRADITIONAL AND MODERN
METHODS TO COLLECT SAMPLES FOR LARVAL DISPERSAL RESEARCH AT
KA’UPULEHU, HAWAI‘I (Abstract ID: 30052)

Hypoxic dead zones are an increasingly common form of coastal habitat degradation
that can have catastrophic consequences for biodiversity, ecosystem function, and
human wellbeing. Dead zones are known primarily from temperate regions, but little
is know about the potential threat of hypoxia in the tropics, despite the fact that risk
factors, including eutrophication and elevated temperatures, are commonplace. Here
we document an unprecedented hypoxic event on the Caribbean coast of Panama and
assess the global risk of dead zones to coral reefs worldwide. The event caused massive
mortality to corals and other reef-associated organisms, but observed shifts in community structure combined with laboratory experiments revealed that not all coral species
are equally sensitive to hypoxia. Analyses of global databases suggest that tropical dead
zones have been severely under-reported, perhaps by an order of magnitude, due to lack
of local scientific capacity for their detection. Our findings suggest that dead zones have
already impacted the structure and function of coral reefs, and that a comprehensive
understanding of dead zone dynamics requires consideration of tropical ecosystems.
The growing threat of coastal hypoxia should be incorporated into monitoring and
management plans for coral reef resilience.

Fishing community engagement in scientific research accomplishes multiple objectives
including increased efficiency obtaining samples from target species, increased understanding of research results, and improved advocacy for management initiatives. We
worked with Hawaiian elders and fishermen to use traditional methods of group fishing
as well as innovative spearguns to collect samples for a genetic study of the resource fish
species Acanthurus triostegus, or Manini. Utilizing both ancient and modern technology,
we were able to collect sufficient samples of this important resource fish species to
derive information on larval dispersal in west Hawai’i Island. In this presentation, we
consider the efficacy of different methods used to obtain fish and propose that abandonment of traditional fishing methods may be a function of declines in fish abundance as
much as other barriers to traditional practice and offer an example of political advocacy
from an unlikely source following direct engagement in scientific data collection.


MARINE PROTECTED AREAS BUFFER DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS OF
MONSOON SEASONALITY ON TROPICAL SEAGRASS FISH COMMUNITIES

A CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE LINKAGES AND OUTCOMES OF BIODI-

8

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

SYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 29493)

SCIENCE-INFORMED CONSULTATION, PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT, AND MANAGEMENT DECISIONS:PLANNING A MARINE RESERVE IN BISCAYNE NATIONAL
PARK, USA (Abstract ID: 28418 | Poster ID: 632)

Two of the premier goals of marine conservation are to achieve sustainable fisheries,
and maintain biodiversity. It is often assumed that these goals are compatible because of
strong and positive functional links between them. For example, in contrast to complete
dependence upon a single prey taxon, a diverse assemblage of forage species can better
support populations of commercially targeted fish predators. Also, sustainable fishing
practices can enhance biodiversity by reducing bycatch of non-target species. However,
there is also a great potential for negative tradeoffs from interventions that support immediate human needs (eg fishing) versus those that support long-term human wellbeing
(eg resilience through biodiversity pathways). These are particularly severe in coral reef
environments, a model for ecosystem service flows in hyperdiverse tropical systems.
While many conservation strategies here take for granted the existence of a strong and
positive link between sustainable fishing and biodiversity, the question has not been
subject to critical evaluation To bridge this knowledge gap we have sought to: 1) identify
interventions routinely deployed to achieve sustainable fisheries or biodiversity maintenance on coral reefs, 2) consider the set of theoretically possible and likely outcomes
that result, and 3) illuminate these based upon a literature review and expert workshop,
to understand the outcomes of these interventions in real world environments. We discuss our results in the context of operationalizing marine ecosystem-based management
in coral reef environments.

The National Park Service (NPS) approved a 2015 management plan for Biscayne
National Park that included a 10,512 acre marine reserve protecting a third of the park’s
reefs. The plan was a culmination of fifteen years of planning that included 22 public
meetings with 1000 attendees, 43,000 public comments, and three plan versions. The
marine reserve was controversial, with opposition to fishing restrictions and arguments
for greater reef protection. Following a 2012 Congressional hearing on the draft plan, the
NPS consulted with the State of Florida to offer two new restricted-fishing alternatives
in lieu of a marine reserve: one alternative with a zone with required special fishing
permits and another with a seasonal fishing zone. Following new information on the
state of the park’s reefs after the 2014 and 2015 coral bleaching events, new studies
on marine reserves and impacts of seasonal closures and restricted fishing on targeted
fish species and recreational fishers, and extensive public comments, the NPS chose a
marine reserve. After a 2015 Congressional hearing on the final plan, the NPS made a
commitment to monitoring and research, in consultation with appropriate federal and
state agencies, for up to 20 years to determine the extent to which the reserve achieves
its stated goals as compared to baseline conditions. Another key commitment is that the
NPS will consider recommendations during this timeframe on monitoring protocols as
well as whether to continue or modify the marine reserve, including its size, geographical
extent, and specific rules and restrictions.



SISTER SPECIES OF THE ORDER ZOANTHARIA (CNIDARIA: HEXACORALLIA)
BETWEEN ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC/INDIAN OCEANS (Abstract ID: 28483)

SHIFTS IN CORAL-ASSEMBLAGE COMPOSITION DO NOT SECURE REEF FUNCTIONING (Abstract ID: 29735)

Understanding speciation processes is one of the main questions in evolutionary biology.
Among benthic taxa, zoantharians (Cnidaria: Hexacorallia) comprise an abundant group
in shallow waters, and colonies are used as shelter or food source. Furthermore, they are
an interesting model to investigate closely related species, as there are reports of sister
species with highly similar molecular sequences from different ocean basins (Atlantic and
Indian/Pacific). However, no study has analyzed such pattern in zoantharians and which
are these pairs remains unknown. Herein we investigated closely related representatives
of the order Zoantharia performing phylogenetic analyses of genera that have species
in both oceans basins. In addition, we analyzed species morphological data. Our aim is
clarify which are these pairs and discuss how this pattern was likely generated. There
are nine zoantharians pairs where one species is reported from the Atlantic Ocean and
another from the Pacific/Indian oceans in four out of ten genera analyzed. These sister
species present identical mitochondrial and closely related nuclear sequences in addition
to highly similar morphological characters. The frequency of sister zoantharians reveals
an unusual pattern compared to what is known for shallow-water reef animals, like corals
and most fishes, which have deep genetic distances between species from different ocean
basins. Due to this high occurrence of pairs and to the species widely distribution within
an ocean, it is likely that a vicariant event(s) has led to sister species in Zoantharia.

Coral communities are changing rapidly worldwide through loss of coral cover and shifts
in species composition. Although many reef-building corals are likely to decline, some
weedy opportunistic species might increase in abundance. Here we explore whether
the reshuffling of species can maintain ecosystem integrity and functioning. Using four
common Caribbean reef-building coral genera we modeled rates of reef construction and complexity. We show that shifting coral assemblages result in rapid losses in
coral-community calcification and reef rugosity that are independent of changes in the
total abundance of reef corals. These losses are considerably higher than those recently
attributed to climate change. Dominance patterns of coral assemblages seem to be
the most important driver of the functioning of coral reefs and thus, the future of these
ecosystems might depend not only on reductions of local and global stressors, but also
on the maintenance of keystone coral species.


THE MAINTENANCE OF CORAL BIODIVERSITY VIA RELATIVE NONLINEARITY OF COMPETITION (Abstract ID: 28929)
The high levels of biodiversity in reef coral assemblages have proven difficult to explain
solely by niche partitioning. Other coexistence-promoting mechanisms, such as the
storage effect, must therefore be operating. Relative nonlinearity of competition is a coexistence-promoting mechanism that allows each species to be favoured under different
resource levels due to differences in the functional response of the per-capita population
growth rate to resource availability. To date, it has only been shown in highly idealized
model communities. In reef-coral assemblages, where space is a limiting resource, this
mechanism could arise from differences in size-dependent susceptibility to mechanical
disturbance between growth forms. We tested for relative nonlinearity of competition
in reef-coral communities using competition models that we calibrated with empirical
estimates of demographic rates for two different pairs of competitors (tabular vs. digitate
corals and tabular vs. massive corals). Results revealed that the tabular species is favored
corals are favored under high resource availability. This occurs because the tabular corals
are superior competitors in calm conditions, where large and fecund colonies are present
in the population. After a disturbance, the large tabular corals are dislodged, reducing
the population fecundity of tables, relative to their competitors. Our results confirm the
plausibility for coral reefs of this previously hypothetical mechanism of coexistence.

ALGAL BIOASSAYS SHOW LAND-BASED, ANTHROPOGENIC NITROGEN IS
DELIVERED TO REEF BIOTA BY GROUNDWATER IN HAWAII AND AMERICAN
SAMOA (Abstract ID: 29691)
Submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) is a source of land-based contaminants to
coastal ecosystems, yet the impact of this process on marine biota remains understudied.
To determine if plants assimilated SGD-derived nitrogen (N) on otherwise oligotrophic
reefs, we compared the N parameters (δ15N values and N concentration) of naturally
occurring macroalgae with those of surface water, coastal groundwater, and terrestrial
groundwater in Hawaii and American Samoa. In addition, tissues of Ulvaspp. were
deployed for 5-6 days to determine the extent of nutrient pollution at 8 coastal sites in
Hawaii. Reduced salinity, elevated 222Rn, and high nutrient levels in beach porewater and
surface water relative to ambient marine water provided evidence that SGD was a sub-

9

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

stantial vector for nutrient delivery to all study sites. The highest δ15N values in algal and
water samples were found adjacent to wastewater treatment facilities that dispose treated
effluent into groundwater via injection wells in Hawaii. The lowest δ15N values and highest
N concentrations in water and algal tissues were found at locations adjacent to sugarcane
fields. On Tutuila, high δ15N values in nearshore algal and water samples, relative to a
control site, suggest that wastewater was a source of N to reefs adjacent to three villages.
In general, regions with little human impact had relatively low N concentrations and δ15N
values. Within developed regions of Hawaii and American Samoa, SGD delivered N
derived from wastewater and fertilizer to marine macroalgae across large spatial scales.

of corals. To determine how corals will respond to the combined effects of warming and
ocean acidification, two common and fast growing Acropora corals (Acropra muricata
and Acropora hyacinthus) were used in a fully factorial experimental study using three
temperature treatments (26 °C, 28.5 ° C and 31 ° C) crossed with three levels of pCO2
(400 ppm, 675 ppm and 950 ppm). Future temperature stress caused a 10 % decline
in survivorship, and 10-50 % decline in calcification across both coral species. End
of century pCO2 reduced survivorship and over long-term lead to 50 % reduction in
calcification. Therefore, temperature had a bigger negative effect than pCO2. Without
adaptation or acclimation, branching corals species most sensitive to temperature stress
and ocean acidification are likely to suffer from declines in health and survivorship that
would drastically reduce reef complexity, and cause shifts in ecosystem function.



THE PERFECT STORM: MATCH-MISMATCH OF BIOPHYSICAL EVENTS DRIVES
LARVAL FISH CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN PULLEY RIDGE MESOPHOTIC REEFS
AND THE FLORIDA KEYS (Abstract ID: 29346)

A FUNDAMENTAL PARADIGM FOR CORAL REEF CARBONATE SEDIMENT DISSOLUTION (Abstract ID: 29975)

Mesophotic coral reef ecosystems are remote from coastal stressors and may be the key
to resilience. While they remain for the most part exposed to fisheries overexploitation,
nothing is known so far about larval fish connectivity between mesophotic and shallow
ecosystems. We use a biophysical model to test the hypothesis that Pulley Ridge, a mesophotic reef in the Gulf of Mexico that hosts a variety of shallow-water tropical fishes,
may replenish shallow fish populations in the Florida Keys. To identify spatio-temporal
patterns of vertical connections we developed a 3-D coral reef habitat module for the
open-source Connectivity Modeling System and simulated larval transport of a demersal
spawner, the bicolor damselfish Stegastes partitus. Virtual larvae were released daily between 60-80m from Pulley Ridge over 60 lunar spawning cycles, and tracked until settlement within a high resolution (900 m) regional hydrodynamic model. These probabilistic
simulations reveal mesophotic to shallow connections with large, yet sporadic pulses of
larvae settling in the Florida Keys. Modal and spectral analyses on the spawning time
of settled larvae, and on the position of the Florida Current front along Pulley Ridge,
demonstrate that specific physical-biological interactions modulate these “perfect storm”
events. This study demonstrates that mesophotic coral reef ecosystems can also serve
as refugia for coral reef fish and suggests that they have a critical role in the resilience of
shallow reef communities.

The success of coral reefs depends on a positive balance of calcium carbonate production exceeding dissolution, erosion, and material export. As a result of ocean acidification, coral reefs could transition from net accretion to net erosion owing to decreasing
rates of calcification and increasing rates of CaCO3 dissolution and bioerosion. Here, we
present a fundamental paradigm that aims to explain the main driver of carbonate sediment dissolution on coral reefs based on theory and empirical datasets of pore water
carbonate chemistry from diverse reef locations in the Atlantic and Pacific. We suggest
that carbonate sediment dissolution is most strongly controlled by the extent of organic
matter decomposition in the sediments, but that the magnitude of dissolution is influenced by how much decomposition is required to reach pore water undersaturation with
respect to the most soluble bulk carbonate mineral phase present in the sediments, a
condition defined as the Carbonate Critical Threshold (CCT). Decomposition of organic
matter beyond the CCT under aerobic conditions results in stoichiometric proportional
dissolution of carbonate sediments. As ocean acidification proceeds over the next
several decades, the extent of organic matter decomposition required to reach the CCT
will decrease, carbonate dissolution will increase, and subsequently the accumulation of
carbonate sediments will decrease.



A FIVE YEAR ASSESSMENT OF CORAL IN FAGA’ALU BAY, AMERICAN SAMOA HAS FIVE YEARS OF MANAGEMENT MADE AN IMPACT? (Abstract ID: 27799)

ANALYSIS OF THE COMPETITION BETWEEN LOBOPHYTUM PAUCIFLORUM
WITH TWO HARD CORALS (Abstract ID: 29069)

Faga’alu Bay on Tutuila island in American Samoa is an US NOAA National Priority
Watershed, and has shallow nearshore reefs along the bay edges. In 2012, four long-term
transects were laid by installing six steel pins for each transect, with two transects on each
bay side to allow for comparative monitoring. One side of the bay is heavily influenced by
stream effluent, which carries high loads of sediment from a quarry, while the other side
of the bay is rarely reached by the stream plume. Photoquads were taken along transects
on a quarterly basis each year and will be analyzed for percent live at the functional
level with the following categories: hard coral cover, rubble, crustose coralline algae, and
macroalgae cover. Based on field observations, we expect data to show the bay side with
minimal stream influence to be more resilient to current bleaching and Crown of Thorn
Starfish impacts, leading to higher overall live coral cover. Conversely, we expect data to
show the bay side influenced by sediment to have lower live coral cover, based on observations of a lack of new growth. The rock quarry implemented extensive new sediment
management techniques in 2012-2014, thus we hope results of the analysis will show
reduced macroalgae and new coral growth on the less impacted side of the bay.

Competition between colonies has shaped coral reef communities throughout their evolutionary history. The product of individual interactions is the overall health of a colony,
and if the colony’s immune system is compromised, it is less likely to win a competitive
interaction. Observational studies imply that contact with, or proximity to competitors triggers immune responses and defense mechanisms on hard corals. The limited
research that has been done on coral immunity has focused on hard corals, and little is
known about the molecular responses of soft corals to immune challenge or contact
were placed in individual tanks together (not in contact) with nubbins of one of two hard
molecular datasets existent, will enable comprehensive gene expression analyses. The
behavior of both hard and soft coral in these experiments was monitored over the following two months, and samples taken for gene expression analysis. Aggressive behavior
was observed by the hard corals towards the soft coral, and preliminary results imply that
the presence of the soft coral affected the polyp activity of the hard corals. These results
suggest that hard corals were reacting in proximity to a potential competitor. Gene
