

CORAL REEFS OF THE MAIN HAWAIIAN ISLANDS: A VANISHING RESOURCE?
(Abstract ID: 28187 | Poster ID: 710)
The coral reefs of the Main Hawaiian Islands are a treasured resource for their cultural
value, recreational use, food, coastal protection, and more. Seemingly robust and ubiquitous, they are in fact sparse, highly vulnerable, and currently imperiled. Reef accretion
is severely limited by wave action, and in general modern reefs mostly consist of a thin
live coral cover over ancestral reefs. Over-fishing, sediment pollution, and now climate
change are threatening coral reef health and resiliency. The 2015 bleaching event was
unprecedented in its severity and extent in Hawai`i, and more such events are projected
to occur in coming decades. In view of the present and increasing stresses, reefs need
effective, protective management to provide opportunities for survival. Specifically,
nearshore regions of the four islands of Maui Nui contain nearly 15,000 acres of reefs
having >50% live coral cover. Overall, these are the largest, most complex, and richest
coral tracts within the Hawaiian Islands. Their extensive distribution, large size, connectivity, and natural wave sheltering make these reefs potentially resilient candidates
for surviving regional-scale threats from climate change if other stresses are eliminated
and they are properly managed. Currently, Hawaiian reefs are largely (<1%) unmanaged
and unprotected, with few restrictions on fishing or pollution. These additional stressors
make them highly vulnerable to bleaching induced by changing climate. Preliminary
evidence indicates that widespread reef die-offs have triggered regime shifts that prevent
reef recovery.


CORAL CONNECTIVITY IN THE GREAT BARRIER REEF: NEW INSIGHTS INTO
CURRENT AND FUTURE DISPERSAL PATTERNS (Abstract ID: 29792)
Dispersal patterns shape species’ distribution, abundance and persistence, their potential
for genetic drift and adaptation, and ultimately determine rates of recovery following
disturbances. Because the larval mortality and competency dynamics of most marine
organism is altered under warmer conditions, it is fundamental to understand how
climate change will alter current connectivity patterns. Here we used an experimentally
calibrated high resolution unstructured-mesh, depth-integrated hydrodynamic model
(SLIM) to project current and climate change-mediated dispersal and connectivity
patterns of corals in the Great Barrier Reef (GBR). We show that as oceans warm, coral
connectivity will decrease. Specifically, the average dispersal distance from origin to
destination reef and the number of incoming connections to each reef decrease. Interestingly, the proportion of larvae that find a suitable place to settle increases because
more larvae will settle in their natal reef. We also show that broadcast spawning species
with greater egg sizes, such as Acropora spp., will experience greater changes in dispersal
patterns than species with smaller eggs. We identified the reefs which contribute the
most to the larval supply in the GBR and the reefs which recovery rates will be more af-


101

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

fected by the change in connectivity patterns. Improved predictions of coral connectivity
are essential to design networks of protected areas that contribute more effectively to
the long-term sustainability and resilience of tropical reef ecosystems.

LINKS BETWEEN COASTAL MARINE ECOSYSTEMS AND HUMAN WELLBEING IN JARDINES DE LA REINA NATIONAL PARK AND CAYOS DE ANA MARÍA
FAUNA REFUGE, CUBA (Abstract ID: 28088 | Poster ID: 599)

INCREASED LOCAL RETENTION OF CORAL LARVAE DUE TO OCEAN WARMING MAY BE OFFSET BY ACIDIFICATION (Abstract ID: 27956)

This study shows the value of the economic benefits that Coastal Marine Ecosystems
from Jardines de la Reina National Park and Cayos de Ana María Fauna Refuge provide
to coastal communities. Values estimated for Jardines de la Reina National Park ($ 3.7
million of Cuban Pesos) are higher than the values of Cayos de Ana María Fauna Refuge
(2.8 million of Cuban Pesos). In case of commercial fisheries, lobster is the main asset. It
is important to continue the diversification of the fisheries activities such as mariculture.
Besides, sustainable tourism, like diving should be increased moderately, giving priority
for employment (such as dive masters, sailors, captains, cooks) to inhabitants of coastal
communities. Sustainable economic activities increase income and conserve coastal and
marine ecosystems at the same time, strengthening the perception of the link between
human wellbeing and conservation of coastal and marine ecosystems.

According to climate change projections, coral reef recovery in the near future will take
place in a warmer, more acidic ocean. The recovery potential of reef metapopulations
relies on an adequate supply of larvae coupled with their capability to successfully
recruit and establish themselves in the destination habitat. This study investigates the
recruitment potential of the threatened Caribbean scleractinian coral Orbicella faveolata
exposed to elevated temperature and ocean acidification (OA) conditions by quantifying
larval survivorship and settlement from 2-14 days post-spawn. Although mortality was
greater at higher temperatures, an earlier onset of settlement competency resulted in
greater total number of settlers than at lower temperatures (78% increase at ambient
CO2). However, this earlier onset was not observed under combined high temperature
and OA conditions, indicating a delay in the development of competency as a result of
high CO2. This delay in settlement due to OA was also observed at lower temperature
with increasing temperatures, this effect will be diminished if CO2 levels reach those
forecast for the end of the century. Using coupled bio-physical connectivity models, we
show how the changes in timing and magnitude of settlement can alter larval dispersal
patterns affecting both the spatial distribution and abundance of potential recruits to
Caribbean reefs and recovery potential as a whole.


ID: 29867 | Poster ID: 517)
Apex predators play a critical role in maintaining the balance of marine ecosystems and
are an important component of Hawaii’s recreational and commercial fisheries. In light
of the increasing pressures on these populations across the main Hawaiian Islands, the
study of apex predator movements in marine protected areas has become a research
priority. To this aim, we used passive acoustic telemetry to investigate the spatial and
temporal movement patterns of five apex predators: bluefin trevally (Caranx melampygus), giant trevally (Caranx ignobilis), green jobfish (Aprion virscens), whitetip reef
sharks (Triaenodon obesus) and grey reef sharks (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos) at the
31 ha Molokini Marine Life Conservation District (MLCD) off Maui, Hawaii. Our results
indicate that the predator assemblage in the MLCD was dominated by teleost fishes
during the day and sharks at night. Residency was variable across species, with bluefin
trevally exhibiting the highest residency in the MLCD and green jobfish the lowest. Long
distance movements between the Molokini MLCD and the other islands of the Maui
Nui Complex were common for grey reef sharks, giant trevally, and green jobfish. These
results indicate that despite its small size, the Molokini MLCD provides a high level of
protection to resident species such as bluefin trevally. While the more mobile species (giant trevally, grey reef sharks and green jobfish) are protected while resident at the MLCD
but open to the fishery during these large scale movements away from the reserve.


REEF FISH SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION AND BENTHIC HABITAT ASSOCIATIONS
ON THE NORTHERN FLORIDA REEF TRACT (Abstract ID: 27957)
The Florida Reef Tract (FRT) extends from the tropical Caribbean up the southeast
coast of Florida into a temperate environment where tropical reef assemblages diminish
with increasing latitude. This study used data from a comprehensive fishery-independent
survey to quantify reef fish spatial distribution along the FRT and define where the
assemblage shifts from tropical to temperate. A total of 1,676 reef fish visual census
surveys were conducted to assess the populations on randomly-selected sites of marine
hardbottom habitats between the Miami River and St. Lucie inlet. Multivariate analyses
were used to investigate differences in assemblages among sites. Depth (<12 m and
12-33 m), general habitat (reef or hardbottom), and slope (high or low) strata explained
the dissimilarities between assemblages. A general trend of cold-tolerant temperate fish
dominated the northern assemblages and more tropical species dominated further south.
In shallow habitats the data clustered in three spatial regions: One south of Hillsboro inlet, one in Northern Palm Beach south of Lake Worth inlet, and one north of Lake Worth
inlet. The assemblage in deep habitats mainly split in close proximity to the Bahamas
Fracture Zone south of Lake Worth Inlet. Reef and hard-bottom assemblages did not
differ significantly within regions but the reef habitat was significantly different than the
hardbottom assemblages elsewhere. Substrate relief was significantly correlated with the
differences in deep assemblages but did not appear to affect the shallow assemblages.


THE IMPACT OF SPONGE FILTRATION ON THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF
CORAL REEF DISSOLVED ORGANIC MATTER (Abstract ID: 29994)
Sponges are efficient filter feeders, removing significant portions of particulates and
dissolved organic matter (DOM) from the water column. Since sponges can process vast
amount of water, they have the potential to shape the availability and composition of DOM
where sponges are abundant. We applied untargeted and targeted metabolomics analytical
techniques to seawater samples prior to entering the sponge (ambient reef water), samples
released from the sponge (exhalent seawater), and to seawater collected just outside of the
reef area (off reef seawater). Reef seawater samples were collected from two sponge species, Ircinia campanaand Spheciospongia vesparium, on a near-shore hard bottom reef in the
Florida Keys. Total organic carbon was not significantly different between samples, but was
highest on average in the ambient seawater samples, followed by the exhalent samples, and
lowest in the off reef samples. In contrast, metabolic profiles generated from the untargeted
metabolomics analysis indicated that the concentration of many (n=430) metabolites was
higher in the exhalent samples, while only some (n=52) metabolites were higher in the
ambient reef samples. Finally, targeted metabolomics analysis revealed variation in the
concentration of specific metabolites between seawater types. This work provides the first
insight into the molecular-level impact that sponges have on DOM and provides a foundation for future experimental studies addressing the influence of sponge-derived DOM on
chemical and ecological processes in coral reef ecosystems.


PREDICTORS OF CORAL STRESS AND MORTALITY DURING DREDGING
(Abstract ID: 29023)
Over the last decade there has been a series of large scale dredging programs off Australia’s
North West Coast. These projects were large by global standards, in terms of the dredge
volumes processed as well as the scale and quantity of associated water quality and biological data that were collected. The data collected during these programs provides an excellent
opportunity to explore: what happens to water quality during dredging; how this impacts
upon coral health; the spatial and temporal scale of dredging impacts; and may ultimately
allow the development of water quality threshold values that can be used to manage other
dredging programs in the future. Characterising water quality using turbidity and light data
collected over minute time frames yet spanning time series of several years can be highly
complex, and can differ greatly across temporal scales (hours versus month) and with the
statistical metrics used (mean verus median). Here we explore a range of water quality
metrics and examine how well these can predict coral stress and mortality.

102

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


signing and implementing mobile applications for improved fisheries data collection and
traceability in artisanal fisheries. Examples of both success and failure provide lessons
for future efforts to promote technology uptake in similar fisheries around the world.



Remote coral reefs offer unique opportunities to explore how biological activities around
coral reefs are influenced by oceanographic variables. Little is known about how oceanographic properties like chlorophyll-a, sea surface temperature, and wave energy flux
influence acoustic biological signals. In this study, long-term passive acoustic monitoring
methods were used to examine the soundscapes of three remote coral reef locations in
the Pacific Ocean. Acoustic signals were separated into different frequency bands and
the relationships between coral reef soundscapes and oceanographic variables were
explored through generalized linear models and generalized additive models. Geophony
is mostly observed in the lower octave bands, while biophony is reflected in the higher
octave bands. Snapping shrimp are the dominant contributors to tropical and subtropical coral reef biophony. While our results confirmed the positive correlation between
snapping shrimp signals and temperature, a negative relationship with chlorophyll-a
was found; as chlorophyll-a increases, the overall soundscape decreases. The site with
the highest levels of chl-a had the loudest soundscape, possibly suggesting that high
nutrient coral reefs support increased snapping shrimp abundance and/or higher levels
of acoustic activity. This study is an example of how an interdisciplinary approach to
exploring relationships between soundscapes and oceanographic variables appears to be
an effective method of further understanding remote coral reef environments.

PHYLOGENETIC PERSPECTIVES ON THE EVOLUTION OF REEF FISH FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY (Abstract ID: 27992)
Functional traits have been fundamental to the evolution and diversification of entire fish
lineages on coral reefs. Yet their relationship with the processes promoting speciation,
extinction, and the filtering of local species pools remains unclear. Using published and
new data, we mapped functional traits on to phylogenetic trees to infer evolutionary
patterns that have led to the current functional diversity of fishes on coral reefs. Diet
and feeding mode were reconstructed on time-calibrated phylogenies for several reef
fish families. We found examples of independent transitions to planktivory across different reef fish families that may represent cases in which ecological opportunity for the
exploitation of different resources drives speciation and adaptation. The evolution of
body sizes in the family Labridae shows no relationship with lineage age, with both large
and small body sizes appearing multiple times within clades of mid-sized fishes. The
reconstruction of range size revealed that ranges are constrained by the geography and
size of ocean basins. Also, there were many cases of disparate range sizes among sister
species. The diversity and evolution of traits within lineages is influenced by trait-environment interactions as well as by species and trait-trait interactions, where the presence
of a given trait may trigger the development of related traits or behaviors. Our efforts to
assess the evolution of functional diversity across reef fish clades add to the burgeoning
research focusing on the evolutionary and ecological roles of functional traits.



FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF THE JELLYFISH CASSIOPEIA XAMACHANA - SYMBIODINIUM SYMBIOSES (Abstract ID: 28817 | Poster ID: 122)

Poster ID: 365)

Jellyfish of the genus Cassiopea rely on the establishment of a symbiosis with the
dinoflagellate Symbiodinium in the asexual polyp portion of their life cycle. The polyp, or
“scyphistomae,” then strobilates a medusa (jellyfish). Many species of Symbiodinium are
able to infect scyphistomae and induce strobilation, but in nature adult Cassiopea xamachana harbor Symbiodinium microadriaticum (= A1). While polyps may be found with
the ephyra stage. To examine functional differences among resident symbionts, net photosynthesis and respiration were measured on ephyra containing either Symbiodinium
While all Symbiodinium spp. photosynthesized at normal high rates when exposed to
Larvae settle on the shady-side of mangrove leaves, and the scyphistomae strobilate
medusae when temperatures are warm enough and they have acquired Symbiodinium.
The medusae move to more sunny areas in mangrove habitats. However, some Symbiodinium are sensitive to the high temperatures/light that occurs in this habitat during the
summer. Symbiodinium microadriaticum survives and has a high photosynthetic rate in
the environment that Cassiopea xamachana thrives in today.

DMS is a biogenic sulfur gas that is particularly abundant in marine ecosystems and
that may influence climate regulation by contributing to the formation of clouds when
oxidised into sulfate campounds in the atmosphere. Today, climate change is altering
marine ecosystems, with these changes being expected to affect DMS production and
emissions in the future. Changes in marine DMS production has been observed in a
diversity of ecosystems such as coral reefs, upwelling ocean, mangrove, saltmarsh and
seagrass environments. However, the extend and consequences of these changes still
remain to be evaluated in order to make appropriate predictions for the fate of DMS in
a changing ocean. Here, we provide a brief review of the prospective changes to DMS
production across the various marine ecosystems.

DELIMITING REEF SPECIES USING HETEROZYGOSITY (Abstract ID: 29816)
Molecular taxonomists commonly turn a blind eye to heterozygosity by discarding loci
that display intra-individual heterogeneity, by excluding heterozygotes from their analyses
and/or by retaining only one of their allelic sequences. Indeed, the chromatograms of
heterozygotes were long considered impossible to resolve without cloning since they
contain double peaks. However, bioinformatic tools such as my programs Champuru
and SeqPHASE are now available to unravel mixed chromatograms. Once the haplotypes of a collection of individuals have been determined accurately using Sanger or
next-generation sequencing, knowing which alleles co-occur in heterozygotes makes
it possible to delineate species in an accurate and sensitive fashion. Here I present a
graphical method that relies on haplotype webs (in short, haplowebs) to delineate reef
species. Haplowebs are trees or networks of haplotypes on which curves are added to
connect haplotypes found co-occurring in heterozygous individuals, thereby providing
an easy, intuitive way to delineate groups of individuals sharing a common gene pool. In
contrast to other popular approaches such as ABGD and GMYC that are geared towards
cannot be rejected beforehand. Haplowebs do not assume species monophyly nor the
existence of a barcoding gap. Besides, haplowebs can be used to detect introgression
and hybridization.


SO YOU’VE GOT SOME TECHNOLOGY, NOW WHAT? (Abstract ID: 29938)
Currently, a gap exists between the potential that technology can play in improving
conservation management—especially increasing fisheries-relevant data collection
in artisanal fisheries—and the reality of implementing that technology effectively on
the ground. There are several drivers behind this short-coming, including: 1) efforts to
promote technology uptake in emerging markets often focus solely on usability when,
in reality, usability is only one of several critical factors that determine whether or not a
specific technology is appropriate for a particular community and purpose; and 2) a disconnect between improved data collection on the water and robust data storage, sharing,
and analytical capacity within fisheries management bodies and seafood supply chains.
With the recent growth in the number of initiatives looking to deploy new on-the-water
technologies for conservation gains, closing this gap becomes increasingly important.
Through dynamic storytelling, this talk will share the experiences and insights around de-

103

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


but that maturity relationships vary on local and regional levels and therefore need to be
determined locally. Phase 1 (late open season) LT: maturity relationships were stronger for
males than females, with >80% probability that males >25mm LT are or have been spawning capable. Phase 2 results (closed reproductive season) are expected to yield stronger
relationships for females. Recommendations are made for size limit revisions to achieve

MANAGEMENT RELEVANT INTERPRETATION OF REEF MONITORING DATA
(Abstract ID: 29714)


Coral reef monitoring is expensive and time consuming, but the data collected is only
infrequently used to guide management actions. One reason for this is that managers
and conservation practitioners lack a simple guide for interpreting and understanding
the ecological meaning of the monitoring data. Here we develop such a guide, using a
medical “diagnosis” and “prognosis” approach. Based on evidence from the published
literature we provide a guide to interpreting the temporal trends in the main coral reef
monitoring attributes recorded by the seven largest coral reef monitoring programmes.
Using select indicators from this guide, we propose a simple decision process for diagnosing the main stressor(s) that have impacted a reef. Finally, we integrate the diagnosis
with further indicators to provide a prognosis for a reef; a measure of the recovery
potential of the reef. Although previous studies have suggested the use of the medical
examination approach for coral reefs, this is the first study to develop this method using
commonly collected, or easy to collect, reef monitoring data. Our work offers reef
managers a guide to what variables to focus monitoring on, and simple methods for
interpreting monitoring data to guide management decisions.

WHY ARE SOME EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC REEFS SO RESILIENT TO ENSO?
BIOASSAYS REVEAL INCREASED HERBIVORY AND NUTRIENT LIMITATION
DURING ENSO (Abstract ID: 28877)
Long term studies of reefs in the Eastern Tropical Pacific before, during and after 2 major
ENSOs (82-83, 97-98) revealed that some reefs showed remarkable resilience through rapid
recovery of coral cover. We hypothesized that increased herbivory and nutrient limitation
during ENSO may limit algal proliferation during warming events and therefore facilitate
coral recovery. We conducted short-term bioassays using dominant species of macroalgae
to compare the relative strength of these top down and bottom up forces prior to and during
ENSO-associated warming in 2 sites in Panama and 1 in the northern Galapagos. At both
sites in Panama herbivory rates increased ~ 60% during warming conditions. While nutrient
limitation was strong prior to warming in both sites, during warming algae was only able to
maintain positive growth when nutrient limitation was reduced by added nutrients, even
while protected from herbivores. In the Galapagos, herbivory was extremely strong regardless of warming. In contrast, nutrient limitation varied greatly across sampling times. Prior
to warming, algal growth in ambient nutrients was vigorous (40-50% increase in 3 days) and
increased up to 90% with added nutrients; however, even mild warming conditions in the
Galapagos caused up to 75% loss of algal biomass, even while protected from herbivores,
regardless of experimental nutrient addition. If intensification of the strength of these processes limiting algal proliferation is maintained, this may facilitate coral recovery. However, it
is possible La Nina may reverse this process and facilitate algae.


EXTENSIVE PHENOTYPIC VARIATION IN CARIBBEAN ACROPORID HYBRIDS
IS LIKELY A MECHANISM FOR ADAPTATION TO CHANGING ENVIRONMENTS
(Abstract ID: 29469)


The merging of two genomes through hybridization produces a unique combination of
traits and phenotypic variation in the hybrids. This phenotypic variation may promote
hybrid adaptation to habitats not accessible to the parent species. While hybridization is
common in corals, evidence for adaptation to new habitats due to morphological innovation in coral hybrids is missing. In the past, hybridization between Caribbean Acropora
generation. New genetic data indicates that hybrids are now mating with each other and
are now observed. Here, we conducted morphometric analyses using high-resolution 3D
scans and scanning electron microscopy on Caribbean acroporid colonies representing
with recent field observations of higher disease resistance, higher thermal tolerance,
higher hybrid abundance, and hybrid habitat expansion suggests that the hybrids’ ecological role and evolutionary potential is changing. Thus, coral hybrids are a possible and
probable mechanism for coral adaptation to changing environmental conditions.

THE MACROECOLOGY OF AGONISTIC INTERACTIONS IN REEF FISHES
(Abstract ID: 29842)
Biotic interactions may influence species coexistence and act as an important selective
pressure for evolution. In coral reefs, interspecific competition can alter spatial distribution of reef fishes and is mainly influenced by variation in habitat quality and species
density. Only a few studies have addressed this issue over large spatial scales. Therefore
we aimed to investigate the relationship between regional richness and the structure of
agonistic interactions of reef fishes. Our dataset comprised seven tropical reefs across
four biogeographic provinces (Brazil, Caribbean, Central Pacific and the Coral Triangle).
Species richness and agonistic interactions data were collected through remote videos
of shallow sheltered reefs, each sample consisting of a 2m 2 area during 10 min. We
observed a higher species accumulation in regionally richer localities and a positive relationship between local and regional richness. For interactive species, we observed the
same trend in species accumulation, but not the local and regional relationship. This pattern can be explained by the increasing species turnover towards richer regions. Moreover, the complexity of agonistic networks increased according to the regional richness
gradient. Damselfishes, surgeonfishes and labrids mainly structured the networks in all
regions and territorial herbivores performed a central role in all local communities. Our
study identified key functional groups in agonistic networks and highlighted the increase
in diversity of interspecific interactions towards increasing regional species richness.


SIZE-MATURITY INDICATORS IN QUEEN CONCH OF PORT HONDURAS
MARINE RESERVE, BELIZE; STRENGTHENING MANAGEMENT FOR IMPROVED
FISHERIES SUSTAINABILITY (Abstract ID: 28736)
Queen conch (Lobatus gigas) is an important food source and economically important
export product in Belize. Overfished in many parts of the Caribbean, international trade of
gigas specific to Port Honduras Marine Reserve (PHMR), south Belize. Until recently, PHMR
enjoyed a relatively stable population, regulated by a 17.8cm national shell length limit or
85g market-clean meat weight, a 3-month closed season, and full protection in Replenishment Zones. However, TIDE fisheries-independent surveys indicate population decline with
diminished reproduction since 2013. Fisheries-dependent catch surveys reveal the proportion of catch with LT <9mm (minimum maturity threshold in other studies) increased from
30% in 2009 to 90% in 2012. Other studies show LT is a more reliable indicator of maturity,


COMMUNITY-BASED SOCIAL MARKETING – THE CONSERVATION TOOL
MOST OF US AREN’T USING BUT PROBABLY SHOULD BE (Abstract ID: 29020)
Community-Based Social Marketing (CBSM) aims to influence behavior in support
of conservation objectives through a well-defined strategic process that is informed
by social psychology and incorporates quantitative research and evaluation methods.
CBSM is underutilized and often misunderstood, but has great potential to foster sustain104

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

able behavior and effect change. Several case studies and their accompanying media
and communication strategies will be presented and critically examined, including the
West Maui Kumuwai Campaign, an ongoing effort focused on reducing the land-based
pollution that impacts coral reefs. ----- *I’m hoping to further edit this abstract later on if
possible, when I don’t have pneumonia...

A COMPREHENSIVE MOLECULAR AND MORPHOLOGICAL STUDY OF CERIANTHARIA (ANTHOZOA,CNIDARIA) ACROSS SEAS (Abstract ID: 27771)
Cerianthids or tube-dwelling anemones (order Ceriantharia) are cryptic, solitary polyps
that live buried in soft sediments in self-constructed tubes, which are made of a fibrous
material made from secreted mucus and a kind of cnidocyst-like cells, known as
ptychocysts, which are unique to this order. Recently cerianthids came to the attention
of the scientific community because of their resilience and dominance in anthropogenic
disturbed costal areas including coral reefs. To date little is know about cerianthid phylogeny and geographical distribution. Here we present a phylogenetic and morphological
characterization of cerianthids collected at several locations: Mediterranean, Baltic Sea,
Celebes Sea, Red Sea and Pacific Ocean. During this effort we identify few new species
and shed lights on their, until now confusing, phylogeny. Furthermore we extensively
characterized their elegant cnidocyst macromolecular structure at an unprecedented
resolution. This work and the data presented here will help to better understand this
order of marine invertebrates that are likely to become an important assessors of
ecosystems perturbance.


INCONSISTENCIES BETWEEN TRADITIONAL AND NEW MONITORING
TECHNIQUES FOR ASSESSING CORAL REEF RESILIENCE: AN EXAMPLE FROM
FIJIAN LOCALLY MANAGED MARINE AREAS (Abstract ID: 29238)


Considering increasingly stressful conditions for coral reefs, it is critical to evaluate the
effectiveness of varying management tools. In this context, it is essential to develop tools
which identify ecosystem trajectories and provide early warnings of reef degradation. To
length which could affect coral recruitment, state of coral-algal interactions that indicate
competitiveness, damselfish movements which influence algal dynamics). A comprehensive review allowed us to develop a suite of informative parameters that were applied
in Fiji, where locally managed marine areas (LMMAs) are well-established and allow
an evaluation of community-based management. Surveys covered two depths inside
and outside of three enforced inshore LMMAs. Location and water quality analyses
confirmed that differences between paired reefs were driven by management. Tentative
results highlight a decoupling between the findings of traditional monitoring and our
parameters. For example, although benthic composition and fish biomass were similar
inside and outside of LMMAs, the former displayed significantly shorter turf length and
higher coral recruitment, implying that LMMAs can indeed enhance reef resilience. We
propose a combination of process and status parameters that should be considered to
improve evaluation of management effectiveness.

LARVAL REEF FISH RESPOND TO DIMETHYL SULFIDE AND HOME TO ITS
SOURCE (Abstract ID: 28203)
Transport of coral reef fish larvae is driven by advection in ocean currents and larval
swimming. For swimming to be advantageous, larvae must use external stimuli as guides.
A potential stimulus is “odor” emanating from coral reefs, which signals the upstream
location of desirable habitat. However, specific chemicals and mechanisms for plume
tracking have not yet been identified. Dimethyl sulfide (DMS) is produced in large quantities at coral reefs and may be an important cue. In this study, a choice-chamber (shuttle
box) was used to assess preference of reef fish larvae for water with DMS and potential
changes in swimming behavior. Video tracking of larval movement was used to compare
swimming patterns in control and DMS seawater. We found a common response to
the presence of DMS across taxa – a preference for water with DMS and a significant
increase in turning frequency - reflecting a switch to “search behavior”. Detailed patterns
of movement when encountering a dyed DMS plume were monitored in a large flume
quickly located the source of odorous plume injections in the flume but did not respond
to plumes of non-odorous dye in seawater. Affinity for and swimming response to relevant concentrations of DMS allows a fish larva to locate its source and would enhance
its ability to find settlement sites. Moreover, it may help them locate high concentrations
of prey accumulating in fronts, eddies, and thin layers, where DMS is also produced.


ISLAND GROWTH DURING RISING SEA LEVEL: JEH ISLAND, REPUBLIC OF THE
MARSHALL ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29552 | Poster ID: 401)
Low-lying reef islands are coral reef associated deposits of biogenic sediment considered highly vulnerable to the effects of sea level rise (SLR). One of the most frequently
discussed impacts of continued SLR is the destabilisation and ‘washing away’ of reef
islands. However, recent studies from throughout the Pacific have shown that reef
islands have been predominantly stable or have accreted since the mid-20th century,
and drive island growth there must be a supply and delivery of sediment to the island.
The sediment contributing to island growth can either be generated under contemporary conditions, or relic sediments which have previously been stored within the reef
framework, or within sub- and inter-tidal or island deposits. Establishing whether islands
can accumulate modern sediment is critical to understanding future trajectories of reef
island change. This study focusses on the island of Jeh on Ailinglaplap Atoll, where aerial
photos from 1943 and satellite imagery from 2010 reveal pronounced island change and
growth. Using radiocarbon dating of recently deposited sections of Jeh Island we are
able to determine that island growth is on-going and largely driven by the accumulation
of modern sediment. The growth of the island has occurred coincident with locally
increasing sea level and these results highlight the importance of sediment supply in the


PARSING METAGENOMIC LOCI FROM THE CORAL HOLOBIONT: NEW INSIGHT INTO UNRESOLVED SPECIES COMPLEXES IN PORITES, POCILLOPORA,
Genetic studies of non-model organisms have been restricted to a few markers that have
limited resolution and utility, resulting in gaps in the understanding of the ecology, evolution, biodiversity, biogeography, extinction risk, and adaptive potential of organisms such
as reef building corals. Next Generation Sequencing approaches such as RAD sequencing have shown promise for resolving both very recent and ancient divergence; however,
the absence of reference sequences creates major challenges for the identification and
comparison of loci particularly for metagenomic datasets such as the coral holobiont.
Here, we discuss several strategies for identifying and parsing loci from components of
the coral holobiont, including reconstruction of complete or nearly complete mitochondrial genome, the ribosomal array, histones and a diverse set of coral protein coding
genes. The resulting data provides unprecedented resolution into unresolved species
complexes. We present several examples of the application of these methods towards
Porites, Pocillopora, and Montipora. We find surprising mitochondrial-nuclear discordance in Porites consistent with hybridization, supported by STRUCTURE analysis from
thousands of SNPs. In contrast, Pocillopora and Montipora have strong concordance
among nuclear and mtDNA datasets, allowing us to examine within species variability
extract and compare known loci from these metagenomic datasets will further improve
as more reference sequences become available, providing additional insights into the
ecology, evolution, and conservation of reef building corals.


105

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM



CONSERVING HAWAIIAN COMMERCIAL HARBOR CORAL REEF RESOURCES
Corps of Engineers (USACE) is responsible for maintaining or expanding federal limits
within commercial harbors; conducting maintenance or new dredging to meet safety
considerations, or expanding the turning basins to accommodate larger cruise ships and
Wildlife Service, National Marine Fisheries Service and State of Hawaii’s Division of
Aquatic Resources. Recent surveys document extensive resources that have adapted
to commercial harbors despite altered water quality conditions, such as exposure to
fresh water, sediments and pollution. These hardy individuals may present clues towards
the future survival of coral reefs in a changing climate. The USACE’s adoption of the
SMART planning process, nationally, is intended to streamline feasibility studies and
expedite project completion, potentially at the expense of adequate mitigation for Hawaiian coral reef resources. The USACE’s Honolulu District Civil Works Division has the
lead for implementing the SMART process locally and therefore, a new paradigm should
be developed and standardized when coordinating the evaluation of project alternatives
and recommendations for mitigating project impacts to coral resources with state and
federal resource agencies.

GROWTH AND LONGEVITY OF ICONIC REEF FISHES IN VERDE ISLAND PASSAGE, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 28588 | Poster ID: 260)
Scarus niger and Acanthurus pyroferus are important iconic grazers in the Northern part
of the Verde Island Passage, Philippines. Hence, important life history characteristics
must be established for purposes of managing their population. The study focuses on
the age and size relationship of these reef fish species using the von Bertalanffy growth
standard length ranged from 119.5 to 159.5 mm with age estimated between 5 to 9
to determine any relationships that would help verify the validity of the age estimates.
The results showed that the size (SL) of both species had strong and linear relationship
with their wet body weight (g) establishing an isometric growth pattern (b≈3.0) for both
species. Furthermore, linearity between otolith width (mm) and otolith weight (mg) was
observed in females only and strong linear relationship between otolith index, fish size
(SL) and body weight (g) for both species. In general samples collected for both species
were at their rapid growth stage and reflected strong linear relationship between their age
and body size. The initial batch of samples collected was at their mid- to large body size
range. Thus, collection in the next two months will now target smaller and much younger
fish to complete the growth history curve for both species.



OCEAN ACIDIFICATION CAUSES STRUCTURAL DEFORMITIES IN JUVENILE
CORAL SKELETONS (Abstract ID: 28010)
Rising atmospheric CO2 is causing the oceans to both warm and acidify, which could reduce calcification rates of corals globally. Successful coral recruitment and high rates of
juvenile calcification are critical to the replenishment and ultimate viability of coral reef
ecosystems. While elevated pCO2 has been shown to reduce the skeletal weight of coral
recruits, the structural changes caused by acidification during initial skeletal deposition
are poorly known. Here we show, using high resolution 3-dimensional X-ray microscopy,
that ocean acidification (pCO2 ~ 900 uatm, pH ~7.7) causes not only reduced overall
mineral deposition, but also a deformed and porous skeletal structure in newly settled
coral recruits. In contrast, elevated temperature (+3°C) had little effect on skeletal formation except to partially mitigate the effects of elevated pCO2. The striking structural
deformities we observed show that new recruits are at significant risk, being unable to
effectively build their skeletons in the pCO2 conditions predicted to occur for ocean
surface water under a ‘business-as-usual’ emissions scenario (RCP 8.5) by the year 2100.

A COMPARISON OF SYMBIOTIC DINOFLAGELLATE (SYMBIODINIUM) COMMUNITIES IN HEALTHY SIDERASTREA SIDEREA CORALS AND THOSE AFFECTED BY DARK SPOT SYNDROME (Abstract ID: 28909 | Poster ID: 160)
Dark Spot Syndrome (DSS) is an indicator disease prevalent in coral reefs throughout the
Caribbean. Often DSS is non-fatal though it can lead to more aggressive diseases such
as Black Band Disease (BB) and Yellow Band Disease (YB). Although ubiquitous, little is
symbiotic dinoflagellate community and potential factors leading to DSS in Siderastrea
siderea corals by microbial comparison of healthy and DSS affected corals from one
time point. To study this syndrome, Symbiodinium communities were collected from
coral mucus samples and were identified using high-throughput techniques to elucidate
potential factors of disease progression. In both healthy and DSS affected samples,
no significant differences were found in the relative abundance of mucus associated
Symbiodinium communities, implicating that DSS is a multi-faceted syndrome that does
not directly impact the photosynthetic Symbiodinium of afflicted corals.


STRESSOR INCREASE CORAL RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE? (Abstract ID:
28236)
Corals face worldwide population declines due to global climate change and local anthropogenic impacts. Global climate change effects are hard to tackle but recent studies
show some coral species can better handle climate change stress when provided with
additional energy resources. The local stress that most undermines energy acquisition is
sedimentation because it impedes coral feeding and their ability to photosynthesize. To
investigate if reducing local sedimentation will enable corals to better endure global climate change, we quantitatively assessed the synergistic effects of increased temperature,
sediment concentration, and sediment composition on the survival and growth of juvenile Porites astreoides. We used sediment from a reef and a boat basin to mimic natural
sediment (more coarse) and anthropogenic sediment (finer grain sizes, more common in
dredging operations). The most detrimental effects were observed with anthropogenic
sediment. We found that corals’ capacity to deal with higher temperatures is improved
when anthropogenic sedimentation is maintained at minimal levels. Our study suggests
that a reduction of allowable NTU’s from 29 to 7 near coral reefs should facilitate coral
juvenile survival under higher temperatures. Additionally, dredging operations should be
conducted in Winter to minimize synergistic effects of temperature and sedimentation.


HAWAII’S ENVIRONMENTAL COURT - BRIDGING SCIENCE TO POLICY
THROUGH IMPROVED ADJUDICATION OF RESOURCE VIOLATIONS (Abstract
ID: 28244)
This paper will examine Hawaii’s Environmental Court, established in 2014. Although
environmental courts exist in other states, Hawaii’s Environmental Court is the first in
the nation with a strong emphasis on natural resource management and enforcement.
The Court was established largely in response to the State’s difficulties enforcing and
adjudicating its laws pertaining to aquatic and terrestrial resources. In addition to other
challenges, the State Department of Land and Natural Resources was having difficulty
achieving positive outcomes for cases involving legally or scientifically nuanced violations. In response to this problem, the Hawaii State Legislature established the Environmental Court. The legislation provided the Court with exclusive jurisdiction over nearly
all of the state’s natural resource statutes. Under the Court’s structure, the judiciary
trains designated judges to hear resource violation cases. Many of the training materials
are developed in collaboration with scientists and resource managers working in corresponding subject matter areas for the State of Hawaii. This results in enhanced judicial
awareness about the impact of resource violations on ecosystems and the communities
that reside therein. Establishment of the Court represents a meaningful and collaborative effort by policymakers, resource managers and members of the judiciary to ensure
that resource violations receive the attention they deserve by persons with specialized
knowledge regarding environmental issues.


106

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

ters on the transect and were later examined to determine percent cover. Four different
categories were created for substrates to determine percent cover: hard coral, soft coral,
algae and other/ unknown, such as sand or live rock. Prominent species of coral and
algae were also noted for each of the photos. After analyzing the data using an independent samples t-Test, results showed significantly more algae cover at the disturbed site
compared to the undisturbed site. Significantly more soft coral and unknown coverage
was measured in the undisturbed site compared to the disturbed site. There was no
significant difference between sites in terms of hard coral coverage. Understanding the
conditions necessary for the support of diverse reef ecosystems, and the possible threats
that could cause them to deteriorate is critical for the effective management of fisheries
and development of marine sanctuaries.


STRENGTHENING SCIENCE AND CAPACITY FOR CORAL REEF CONSERVATION (Abstract ID: 29898)
Effective coral reef conservation relies on ecological and social monitoring and evaluation to inform adaptive management. With potentially high costs of monitoring and most
coral reefs in developing countries, strategies to ensure a good return on investment are
study design, data management, communication); and strengthening local scientific
capacity for this full cycle of monitoring. We highlight initiatives in the Coral Triangle
and beyond that aim to increase scientific value of monitoring without significantly
increasing costs. 1) In the Bird’s Head Seascape of Indonesia, long-term investments
were made to build capacity of local staff to manage, analyze, interpret and communicate data. 2) In five countries with high marine biodiversity and community dependency
on fisheries (Belize, Brazil, Mozambique, Indonesia, and the Philippines), a monitoring
program was designed to evaluate the outcomes of TURF-reserves (territorial use rights
for fisheries and no-take reserves) coupled with community engagement. Both efforts
seek to support site-level adaptive management as well as multi-scale analyses to inform
marine conservation policy, and both required increased attention to study design and
data management. This has spurred innovative tools to enhance collaborative analysis
and communication, offering tremendous opportunity for advancing science and laying
the foundation for scaling effective and efficient approaches to place-based marine
conservation and fisheries management.


DISTANCE DECAY IN SIMILARITY OF CORAL REEF COMMUNITIES (Abstract
ID: 29073)
Distance decay of community similarity is a fundamental concept in ecology, where
near things are more related than distant things, and was once known as the ‘’First Law
of Geography’’. Nevertheless, despite the fundamental importance of distance decay
for understanding the processes that structure assemblages of species, almost all our
understanding of this phenomenon comes from studies of tropical plant communities. In this study we quantify distance decay in a marine invertebrate community by
comparing scleractinian coral assemblages along an 1100km latitudinal gradient on the
Great Barrier Reef. We also compare the rates of distance decay between three distinct
habitats; outer shelf, lagoonal and mid-shelf reefs. Despite the general view that marine
systems are more ‘open’ than terrestrial systems, we find overall distance decay to be
as strong in marine benthic assemblages as in terrestrial assemblages. We use the novel
method of beta-diversity partitioning to look further into the processes that cause this
distance decay, and find that differences in taxonomic β–diversity between reefs are
governed by species replacements rather than a net change in diversity (species loss or
gain). Furthermore, the replacement of species appears to be by species from within the
same functional group, as no distance decay of functional β–diversity was found. These
analyses indicate that species replacement is not a random process, and our results
therefore provide insight into the environmental and biological processes that structure
coral reef assemblages.


REGIONAL-SCALE OCEANOGRAPHY INFLUENCES BENTHIC CORAL REEF
COMMUNITY STRUCTURE IN THE REMOTE CENTRAL PACIFIC (Abstract ID:
29881)
Increased inorganic nutrient concentrations are often associated with changes in community structure on coral reefs, particularly shifts from coral to macroalgal-dominated
states. Yet experimental manipulations of nutrients have often been conducted over
limited temporal scales and do not examine ecosystem-scale responses. Using five uninhabited islands that span a natural gradient of nutrient availability in the remote central
Pacific, we examined how distinct nutrient regimes relate to the structure of benthic
coral reef communities in the absence of local human impacts. Specifically, we tested
how this natural gradient influenced the relative abundance of key benthic taxa and the
proportion of autotrophy to heterotrophy in common coral species across depth (5-30
m). We hypothesized that corals on more nutrient-limited reefs would exhibit higher dependence on autotrophy at shallower depths while corals on more nutrient-replete reefs
would exploit heterotrophic resources at all depths. Ambient inorganic nitrogen concentrations ranged from 0.46-4.45 µ mol · L-1and we observed diverse patterns in coral and
algal cover across this gradient. Coral cover varied from 5-87% and 0-78% at 5 and 30
m, respectively. Heterotrophy in corals correlated positively with nutrient availability and
did not exhibit clear depth zonation at more nutrient-rich islands. These results suggest
that natural nutrient delivery can have dynamic impacts on benthic coral reef communities that are more complicated than direct shifts towards macroalgal-dominance.


PUTTING MARINE POLICY INTO PRACTICE: THE USE OF POLICY IN MARINE
PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 27869)
An ever-growing range of environmental, legal and policy initiatives, such as international agreements, laws and conventions aim to protect biodiversity, and improve
management of human activities which impact on marine environments. Along with
policies at the international level, complexity is added by a range of national and state
policies. For effective management to occur, the intent and goals of these policies at
various jurisdictional levels need to be harmonised and integrated. Fragmented sectorbased marine management is likely to be a major contributor to the decline in health
of oceans, where problems created by a patchwork of policy constrain achievement of
management goals. We analyse how the management of Australian marine protected
areas (MPAs) is undertaken when applying a range of policy, agreements and legislation,
and how the policy implementation process is actually achieved. The implementation of complex marine environmental protection policy requires cooperation and
communication amongst key institutions and actors, and necessitates establishment
of clear hierarchies, detailed objectives, and specific roles and responsibilities of those
implementing policy. We conducted semi-structured interviews with MPA managers,
practitioners and policy makers across several Australian jurisdictions. Qualitative data
from interviewee responses were categorised, and themes identified. Our results provide
evidence for future improvement of policy development, implementation processes, and
MPA outcomes in Australia and beyond.


DIFFERENCE IN SUBSTRATE COVERAGE BETWEEN A DISTURBED AND AN
UNDISTURBED CORAL REEF SITE AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR FISHERIES
MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 28854 | Poster ID: 410)
This study was conducted in the Dampier Straight, Raja Ampat, Indonesia, one of the
most biodiverse coral reef regions in the world. Two sites were chosen, a disturbed
reef that was in very close proximity to a fish farm, as well as the presence of boating
detritus and an undisturbed reef site that had no such anthropogenic influences present.
Comparison of visual differences in substrate coverage were examined at each reef. Six,
20 meter transects were completed at each site. A photograph was taken every two me-

107

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


QS activity in the absence of cembranoid diterpenes? Bacterial biosensors in combination with chromatography, structure elucidation and molecular biology techniques were
used to address these questions. QS activity, both induction and inhibition, was prevalent
amongst soft corals extracts and bacterial isolates tested. Variations in the oxygen ring
of cembranoid diterpenes resulted in a change from QS induction to QS inhibition.
Finally, the presence of a non-cembranoid diterpene QS mimic was established in the
soft coral Nephthea brassica. Results suggest QS interference may help mediate bacterial
communities.

IMPACTS OF INVASIVE LIONFISH ON NATIVE FISHES FOUND ON CONTIGUOUS CORAL REEFS SURROUNDING LITTLE CAYMAN ISLAND, BVI (Abstract ID:
29631)


Indo-Pacific lionfishes in the western Atlantic Ocean and broader Caribbean region
generate concerns about reduced abundances of native fishes, increased competition
with native piscivores and disrupted trophic interactions. Many hypotheses regarding
potential consequences of the invasion arise from studies of patch reefs, but studies of
larger, contiguous reefs should yield broader insights that will improve management.
On such reefs off Little Cayman Island, BVI, lionfish were culled from 3 experimental
sites in each quarter for 3 years. In conjunction, lionfish and potential prey fishes were
counted along 50 m x 2 m transects at each of the culled sites and at 3 nearby control
sites. Culls maintained reduced numbers of lionfish, and analyses indicated a broad diet
and a shift to piscivory for 1-4 year-old lionfish. Counts of 89 potential prey species did
not indicate ecologically important variation in presence/absence, diversity or evenness
between culled and control sites. Twenty-seven species exhibited ecologically important
differences in abundance, with multiple species commonly found in lionfish stomachs
basslet and blackcap basslet). The remaining 62 species were more abundant at sites
with lionfish, or they exhibited variable abundances. Thus, this study provides insight
into the feeding habits of lionfish, a valuable documentation of “realized” impacts from
lionfish predation and reason to believe that detrimental impacts can be managed effectively using culling.

DIVERSITY IN SPONGE HOLOBIONT FUNCTIONING: THE ROLE OF MICROBIAL ABUNDANCE, HOST SPONGE IDENTITY, AND GEOGRAPHY (Abstract ID:
29719)
Although marine sponges are frequently placed into functional categories based on their
overall microbial abundance (High and Low Microbial Abundance [HMA and LMA]),
recent research has shown that these communities and overall interactions are highly
variable across individual species. To elucidate the role that overall microbial abundance,
photosymbiont abundance, host sponge identity, and geography play in holobiont C
and N cycling, we used a stable isotope approach in conjunction with multivariate and
ellipse-based analyses. This allowed us to evaluate the core isotopic niche of a species or
group and investigate factors driving the placement of individuals within isotopic space.
Up to 14 sponge species were collected from three Caribbean sites (Panama, Honduras,
was attributed to geographic location, but this effect was greatly minimized when data
from the temperate reef were excluded. Within individual sites, HMA and LMA groups
filled unique niche space. However, host identity accounted for at least 70 percent of
the variation in isotope values within a site, while photosymbiont and overall microbial
abundance accounted for a much lower proportion of this variation. Together these data
suggest that microbial symbionts may allow sponges to expand into novel niche space
on tropical reefs, but species placement within isotopic space is relatively stable and is
likely structured more by host-specific microbial community composition than by overall
microbial or photosymbiont abundance.


IMPACT OF GROWTH ANOMALY ON GENE EXPRESSION IN THE CORALMONTIPORA CAPITATA (Abstract ID: 30008 | Poster ID: 27)
Growth anomaly (GA) is a coral disease of unknown etiology that affects corals around
the world. GA exhibits high prevalence in a common Hawaiian coral, Montipora capitata,
at the study site in Waiopae, Hawaii. We used RNA-seq to analyze coral tissue from
healthy colonies, GA lesions, and apparently healthy regions of GA-affected colonies to
holobiont constituents, our de novo transcriptome assembly was filtered into putative
coral (15,585) and Symbiodinium spp. (21,265) transcript subsets. Both coral andSymbiodinium transcriptomic patterns were most highly correlated with theSymbiodinium clade
harbored by the host, with 1,767 and 7,804 differentially expressed genes, respectively
(FDR>0.001, FC>2). Despite such strong influence of Symbiodinium clade on host
transcription (detailed in another presentation), we identified 121 coral genes that were
differentially expressed among tissue types (FDR>0.05, FC>1.4), while no Symbiodinium
genes showed differential expression among tissue types. Pair-wise comparisons of
coral gene expression among tissue types revealed the greatest difference between GA
lesions and healthy colonies. The functions of these genes are consistent with reported
physiological impacts of GA on coral, and may provide hints to understanding the etiology of this disease. This study shows the utility of RNA-seq to understanding molecular
pathology, as well as the interactions among coral host and symbiont.


ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF REMOTELY SENSED CORAL REEF REFLECTANCE
WITHIN THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS AND PAPAHĀNAUMOKUĀKEA MARINE
NATIONAL MONUMENT (Abstract ID: 28396)
Coral reefs are among the most diverse, productive ecosystems worldwide & provide
economically important services to many coastal nations. Within the state waters of
Hawai’i the net economic contribution of coral reefs is approximately $360 million/
year & the overall value is estimated at nearly $10 billion. Coral reef health, diversity, &
cover are thought to be declining globally in response to pressures from human activity
& climate, resulting in the need for more efficient & accurate monitoring methods. Thus,
remote sensing from aircraft & satellites is viewed as a potentially important tool for reef
ecosystem scientists & resource managers alike. As a test of potential remote sensing
application, spatial & temporal gradients in remotely sensed coral reef reflectance
are investigated for reef systems within the Hawaiian Islands & adjacent waters of
the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument. Spectral reflectance is used
to estimate coral reef ecological state, expressed as combinations of three spectrally
unique regimes: 1) healthy calcifying corals, 2) turf and coral rubble-dominated, & 3)
fleshy macroalgae. Remotely measured coral reef reflectance is verified with reflectance
models using in situ measurements of benthic reflectance. Coral reef regime is derived
as a function of location & time from remotely sensed imagery collected via aircraft &


SOFT CORALS AS QUORUM SENSING MIMICS? NEW PERSPECTIVES ON
WELL-KNOWN COMPOUNDS (Abstract ID: 30168 | Poster ID: 152)
Quorum Sensing (QS), a mechanism coordinating gene expression across bacterial populations, is a potential pathway of interaction between a host organism and its associated
microbial community. QS signal molecules are extracellular, allowing their interference
and mimicry. The active site of, acyl homoserine lactones, well-known QS signal molecules, includes an oxygenated ring. Many Alcyonacean soft corals contain cembranoid
diterpene metabolites that possess similar structural features. Bioactivity in cembranoid
diterpenes have been heavily studied but no consensus has yet been reached on their in
situ ecological roles. This study investigated the potential for QS to mediate interactions
between soft corals and their associated bacteria with four questions. 1) Do soft coral
extracts demonstrate QS activity; 2) Do bacteria associated with soft coral surfaces
utilise QS systems; 3) Is any QS activity due to cembranoid diterpenes; and 4) Is there


ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN CORAL REEF SOUNDSCAPES AND TROPHIC
GROUPS IN THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 27902)
Passive acoustic evaluation and monitoring of coral reefs may offer a fast, quantitative
technique that reveals aspects of ecological function important for resource management. Here we report associations between visually observed nocturnal and diurnal reef

108

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS
gov
gov

ecology, and spectral aspects of reef soundscapes from 23 sites throughout the Hawaiian archipelago. Results integrated over all field sites suggest that larger, highly mobile
predatory fishes were correlated with low frequency (< 2 kHz) daytime and evening
sound levels. The presence of small benthic fish and herbivorous fishes were also correlated with sound levels in this band. Reef-based predatory fishes were correlated with
higher frequency (1-20 kHz) evening sound levels. The nocturnal presence of benthic
crustaceans was also associated with evening sound levels in bands up to 20 kHz. In
addition to an association with sound level magnitudes, variability in observed numbers
of crustaceans, herbivorous fishes, and echinoderms was correlated with the temporal
variability of the soundscape components with which their presence was associated.
These results suggest that sound levels in certain frequency bands are associated with
unique groups of organisms, and that predators may use these sounds as cues to seek
areas where appropriate prey are more abundant. Cost-effective and more accurate
coral reef monitoring techniques are urgently required. Using associations such as these,
remote and autonomous passive acoustic recording devices may be used to identify reef
areas where ecological functionality is more robust.

HUMAN-INDUCED GRADIENTS OF REEF FISH DECLINE IN THE HAWAIIAN
ARCHIPELAGO VIEWED THROUGH THE LENS OF TRADITIONAL MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 29077)


Large declines in reef fishes in Hawaii over the past century have raised concerns about
the sustainability of these resources and the ecosystem as a whole. To help elucidate the
reasons behind these declines, we conducted a comprehensive examination of reef fishes across the entire Hawaiian Archipelago by synthesizing all available visual survey data
since 2000 into a single database representing > 25,000 surveys. The moku or district
was the basic unit of marine resource management in pre-contact Hawaii and was used
as a unit of spatial stratification. Biomass of resource species was negatively correlated
with human population density among moku, however we found no such relationship for
species not targeted by fishing. A number of remote areas with small human populations
still support high fish standing stocks, and are likely important refugia for maintaining
fisheries production and biodiversity functioning. Marine protected areas (MPAs) were
effective in conserving fish populations, with size, age, and habitat quality important determinants of MPA success. Current centralized, top-down management is incongruent
with traditional place-based management that was developed at the community level.
There is increasing interest among communities and coastal stakeholders in integrating aspects of customary Hawaiian knowledge into contemporary co-management. A
marine spatial planning framework should be applied that incorporates existing MPAs
to create a multi-use zoning plan engaging stakeholders at all levels in order to maximize
resilience of ecosystems and communities.

EVIDENCE FOR FINE-SCALE NICHE PARTITIONING OF PARACIRRHITESSPECIES AT FLINT ATOLL (SOUTHERN LINE ISLANDS) VIA METAGENOMIC
ANALYSIS OF GUT CONTENTS (Abstract ID: 30051)
Niche partitioning and trophic/functional versatility are known to influence patterns
of speciation among coral reef fishes. Current trophic designations of reef fishes are
coarse, however, suggesting dietary overlaps which seemingly conflict with Gause’s
law of competitive exclusion. Fine-scale differences in diet beyond that of traditional
designations are likely, but perhaps undescribed. Hawkfishes in the genus Paracirrhites
are an apt model system with respect to speciation and ecological niche differentiation,
exhibiting striking differences in coloration in addition to described differences in habitat
and potential foraging preferences. Fish from fourParacirrhites species were collected
from Flint Atoll in the Southern Line Islands of the Republic of Kiribati. Analysis of the
metagenomic data from hindgut samples revealed differences in taxonomic composition
metagenomic data, including presumed prey abundance, revealed further evidence of
partitioning among species. This included separate clustering of the two color morphs
foraging preferences. In all, diets of related reef fishes hold potential to be much more
complex than previously described.


ONLINE FRAMEWORK FOR COLLABORATIVE ANNOTATION OF UNDERWATER
IMAGERY & VIDEO (Abstract ID: 29134)
Ecologists and biologists have increasingly relied on digital video & imagery to examine
and monitor coral reefs and other marine habitats. Gathering these large data streams is
becoming routine, but transforming them into quantitative information for science and
policy decisions, requires substantial effort by human experts. Data syntheses between
and within different groups is limited by inconsistent workflows and non-standard
analysis, which pose barriers to data reuse and limit collaboration. Furthermore the
lack of standardised workflows often results in significant lags between data collection
and scientific discovery. We present an online framework for annotating georeferenced
underwater imagery & video that enables speedy access to survey data through interfacing pre-existing, decentralised online storage facilities. This new framework provides
consistent, customisable annotation schemes and data management capability through
map-based tools enabling the exploration, querying, analysis and synthesis of annotated
visual data. A centralised repository of georeferenced annotation data catalogued in
a consistent format opens up the possibility of answering ‘big picture’ questions and
provides opportunities to access large data sets for training machine learning algorithms.
These algorithms ultimately have the potential to provide a scalable, cost-effective and
collaborative environment for dealing with huge volumes of seafloor image & video
data that can continuously improve and adapt through input from ecologists, biologists,
experts and even citizen scientists.


LARGE-SCALE CORAL REEF RESTORATION IN SEYCHELLES ADAPTED TO
CLIMATE CHANGE (Abstract ID: 29566)
We completed large-scale coral reef restoration at Cousin Island Special Reserve, Republic of Seychelles, to recover coral loss due to the 1998 El Nino-Indian Ocean Dipole
and 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. Using “coral gardening”, first, we harvested fragments
from donor colonies or corals of opportunity and reared them in mid-water rope nurseries for 1-2 years. Second, we transplanted the nursery corals to a degraded reef site. Nine
nurseries built with recycled materials had 40,000 coral fragments of 9 species: Acropora
we transplanted 24,431 corals to a degraded reef site during December 2012-April 2013
and November 2013-April 2014. Mean coral survival from nursery to transplantation
was 86.5 %. The restored area was 5,225 m2. We scaled-up experimental-sized restoration techniques. We developed time-saving “cleaning stations”, so fish conditioned corals
prior to transplantation. Animal-assisted cleaning at nurseries reduced person-hours
2.75 times. The restoration enhanced coral settlement and recruitment, increased fish
biomass, and had lower bleaching rates than natural reefs. The use of cement and
natural substrate to transplant corals, big nursery-reared colonies (10-20 cm wide), high
transplant density (4-8 corals/m2) and a species composition similar to a healthy coral
reef were critical for success. Large-scale coral reef restoration is feasible, affordable, and
restores ecosystem function


GENOMIC EVIDENCE FOR ECOLOGICAL SPECIATION IN CORAL ASSOCIATED
NUDIBRANCHS (Abstract ID: 29757)
Many marine species have highly dispersive larvae that can travel long distances via
ocean currents. As such, there appear to be insufficient dispersal barriers in marine
ecosystems to attribute the great diversity of species solely to vicariance. Corals often
host other invertebrates and fishes in mutualistic or parasitic relationships. Symbiotic
109

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

As molecular phylogenetic analytical techniques have developed, more and more
knowledge about the diversity of the order Zoantharia (Hexacorallia) has been obtained
over the last two decades. Order Zoantharia, characterized by the encrustation of
granules into the body, had been one of the least examined orders within Anthozoa
because of the few useful concrete morphological features for taxonomy. Thus, only a
few zoantharians species have been used for the phylogenetic studies on higher taxa,
and the phylogenetic relationships between Zoantharia and the other orders in subclass
Hexacorallia remain unclear. Although in general topologies of Hexacorallia are different
among various studies, most show order Actiniaria is closest to Zoantharia. Here we
show results from a phylogeny constructed with mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase
subunit I (COI), the most common marker for DNA barcoding, and compare with a 16S
ribosomal DNA phylogeny. Until now COI has not been used much with Actiniaria. The
Halcuriidae Actinerniidae Microzoanthidae, Nanozoanthidae), and the resulting phylogenetic tree shows Zoantharia and Actinaria are more closely related and less distinct than
previously assumed. While the tree also shows the monophyly of Zoantharia, there is the
possibility of paraphyly of Actinaria.

relationships are known to promote ecological speciation in insect-plant systems, but
this process is relatively unexamined on coral reefs. Nudibranchs in the genus Phestilla
live and feed upon specific coral hosts. Previous work demonstrates that host shifts have
occurred and may be the mechanism for speciation. We examine the roles of geography
and coral host in ongoing population divergence within Phestilla minor. We sequenced
and genotyped genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using restrictionassociated DNA from nudibranch specimens collected across Indonesia. Population
structure analyses reveal strong divergence across the Sunda Shelf regardless of coral
host, but on the Pacific side, populations from different coral hosts have diverged despite
close proximity. These results imply that coral host acts as a stronger barrier to gene flow
than purported geographic barriers in the Pacific Ocean. The existence of extremely differentiated SNPs (outlier loci) between host-separated populations reveals the important
role of natural selection in this ecological divergence.


SEDIMENT REMOVAL INCREASES TURF ALGAE GRAZING AND ALTERS ALGAL
COMMUNITY COMPOSITION ON CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 29141)
Many abiotic factors threaten coral reefs, including sedimentation from terrestrial
runoff and storm activity. Sedimentation has known negative effects on corals, reducing
coral growth and reproduction and damaging live tissue. Corals also compete with turf
algae growing on the reef, and herbivorous fishes can facilitate coral growth by grazing
on these algae. Studies in the Pacific have shown that sedimentation can decrease
herbivory by grazing parrotfishes and surgeonfishes. Herbivorous fishes on Caribbean
reefs also adjust their feeding behavior across small scales, but effects of sediment cover
on algal grazing are not well-studied. To test how sediments influence the behavior of
herbivorous fishes on Caribbean reefs we conducted a sediment removal experiment on
three reefs in the upper Florida Keys. We compared short-term changes in grazing pressure and algal cover and height on plots where we experimentally removed sediments
with control plots. We found that grazers significantly reduced algal cover and length in
and Acanthurus coeruleus) increasing significantly in experimental plots, while others
harm corals by decreasing algal removal by common herbivorous fishes, but the effect
may depend on the grazing species present.

VARIABILITY OF TEMPERATURE-INDUCED BLEACHING WITHIN AND AMONG
CORAL COLONIES (Abstract ID: 28291)
Many studies have shown that seawater temperature anomalies can cause bleaching of
anthozoans, and some studies have demonstrated that bleaching susceptibility varies
among species. However, spatial variability of bleaching within the same species has not
been well investigated, although it is often observed. In laboratory experiments, colonies
of Palythoa caribaeorum were exposed to water flow at controlled temperatures. In a
high-flow, high-temperature regime, upstream sides of large colonies bleached less than
downstream sides, and small colonies bleached less than large colonies. The results
efflux of toxic reactive oxygen species from coral tissues). Cold temperatures also cause
bleaching. Colonies of Acropora sp. are being monitored at approximately 20 m depth
off the coast of Okinawa, Japan, where bleaching has been observed during the coldest
months. However, not all colonies equally bleached at low temperature, and degrees of
bleaching were not uniform within a given colony. This may be due mainly to variability
of local water currents, as shown in laboratory experiments or to genetic susceptibility
of corals and/or symbiotic algae. Other possible factors as well as bleaching mechanisms in general, understanding of which will eventually help coral reef management
and conservation efforts, are also discussed.



NO FREE LUNCH: IMPLICATIONS OF SYMBIOTIC RELATIONSHIPS ON THE
CORAL IMMUNE RESPONSE VIA THE TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTORBETA SIGNALING PATHWAY (Abstract ID: 28200)
The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) pathway is often used by parasites to promote tolerance on the part of the host. Similarly, so as to not be destroyed by the immune
system, coral symbionts may suppress host immunity through this pathway. Corals are
dependent upon symbiotic dinoflagellates of the genus Symbiodinium for their nutritional
needs. However, Symbiodinium may upregulate host TGF-beta expression to allow for
the establishment and maintenance of symbiosis. We investigated this hypothesis using a
previously generated immune challenge data set. Five colonies of Orbicella faveolata were
exposed to bacterial lipopolysaccharides. RNA was extracted from each replicate of the
five colonies and analyzed using RNAseq. Differential expression analyses identified 17
differentially expressed transcripts which had potential immune function. Inexplicably,
several of these immune transcripts, termed ‘dysfunctional’, decreased in expression
following immune challenge. Bioinformatic techniques were then used to identify components of the TGF-beta signaling pathway in our resultant transcriptomes. Expression
