hurricanes and swells over 6m.

au

ID: 28393)


The declining abundance of Caribbean Acropora cervicornis has been well documented,
recovery, or true refugia. Here we document the extent and persistence of one of the
Coral Gardens, Belize despite a decline in abundance elsewhere. Over 7 ha of Acropora
spp.-dominant reefs were mapped at Coral Gardens. Live coral was quantified from
photographic data of over 130 m2 quadrats each year from 2011-2014 at fixed locations.
Mean live coral ranged from 33%-30% with 18% of individual quadrats having greater
than 50% live coral in 2014. Live coral cover may be decreasing, but only comparatively
cervicornis at Coral Gardens, corals were collected at 5 cm stratigraphic intervals from
a 2 m pit excavated beneath non-living reef framework. Dead corals were also carefully
extracted from within living canopy using 1.5 m extendable tools. The age of 43 corals
was determined using conventional radiocarbon methods and 8 (24 pending) using
high-precision U-Th dating techniques. Data show corals persisting through the well
documented 1980’s-1990’s regional die-off. We suggest that this location is a modern
refugia for Acropora corals.

ABUNDANCE DRIVING PHYSICAL CONTACT INTERACTIONS WITH SCLERACTINIAN CORALS IN MARGINAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 27846 | Poster ID: 310)
Understanding the mechanisms structuring ecological interactions is a main challenge
in Ecology, as it can help maintain communities in different environments. Despite the
worldwide distribution of marginal reefs and its clear differences to more typical reefs,
few studies focus on the biology and ecology of species in these systems. Here, we
quantified physical contact interactions of benthic organisms with scleractinian corals in
four marginal reef areas along the Brazilian coast. We characterized these interactions
using tools derived from the complex network theory. We also investigated if the interactions occurred as expected by the organisms’ abundance, or if biological characteristics,
such as defense tentacles of hard corals, hampered contact with other organisms. We
found that abundance is a key factor structuring benthic contact interactions, regardless
species identity, species richness or physical characteristics of the reef. In each area, all
coral species interacted more with the most abundant benthic group, the epilithic algal
matrix; and in all networks, abundant organisms interacted more among them and few
interactions occurred between low abundant groups. These results suggest that, in the
studied range, competitive mechanisms may not play a very significant role in shaping
interactions with corals. We hypothesize that this occurred due to the unusual reef environments for corals in Brazil. Hence, species tolerance to these conditions can be more
relevant than biotic characteristics in affecting ecological interactions in non-optimal
environments.


MARINE CONSERVATION THROUGH ART (Abstract ID: 28071)
The Marine Foundation, founded in 2009 by artist Celia Gregory,pioneered the Living
Sculptures in the Sea Eco art program. As a dive master her creative eye provided a
unique perspective into the underwater world. She travelled to reefs around the world
and it was clear the environmental story was depressing. Eager to help find a solution,
she worked with marine scientists,ideas of artificial reef and coral gardening and realised

129

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


Indo-Pacific and eastern Africa and yet the environmental forcing of these systems
remains poorly understood. We conducted a study in the remote and pristine Kimberley
region of Western Australia where large semidiurnal tides (12m range) drive rapid
changes in light, temperature (up to 10 deg. C over 6 hours), and water chemistry. We
measured community production and respiration in seagrass and algal-dominated communities present on an intertidal reef flat over a full spring-neap tidal cycle during both
wet and dry seasons using a 1-D control volume approach. High rates of community
respiration routinely drove reef flat oxygen levels to hypoxia at night. Gross community
production was found to be free from photoinhibition in all communities, even during
periods of exposure to high light. Results from this study highlight the phase difference
between diurnal tide and light cycles as a key control on daily rates of community production and respiration. Overall, we find that reef communities in this shallow, tropical,
and tide-dominated habitat are highly productive and display remarkable tolerance to life
in a strongly variable environment.

COMBINED RESPONSES OF THE CORAL MICROBIOME AND CORAL PHYSIOLOGY TO ELEVATED TEMPERATURE AND PCO2 (Abstract ID: 27996)
We experimentally investigated the links between changes in the coral microbiome and
physiology in response to elevated temperature and pCO2 expected by the end of this
century in two species of corals: Acropora millepora and Turbinaria reniformis. Corals
were maintained under treatment (pCO2 of 750 µatm and 29.0˚C) or control (pCO2
of 364 µatm and 26.5˚C) conditions for 24 days and fed brine shrimp nauplii bi-weekly.
Overall microbial communities differed between coral species, and between control and
calcification and a 35% increase in protein content compared to controls. In comparison,
Rhodobacteraceae) and while treatment corals experienced declines in calcification and
endosymbiotic algal density of 40 and 25%, respectively. Overall, protein content best
described the microbial NMDS pattern of the corals with lipids being associated with the
separation between treatment and controls. Thus, sensitivity of the coral microbiome to
climate change is correlated with energy reserves. This is consistent with findings showing that energy reserves play a strong role in coral susceptibility and recovery to coral
bleaching and suggests that energy reserves may be more crucial to coral holobiont
resilience to climate change than previously appreciated.


INDIRECT EFFECT OF LONGTERM CLEANER WRASSE PRESENCE ON THE
BENTHIC COMMUNITY (Abstract ID: 28552)
An ongoing manipulation of cleaner wrasse at Lizard Island, Great Barrier Reef, showed
that the abundance and species richness of grazer fishes is reduced on patch reefs
maintained free of cleaners for 8.5 y compared with controls (both treatments at 2 sites).
Here, we tested whether this affected the benthos, by investigating potential flow-on
affects to coral, algal turf, and sediment load dynamics after 12-14 y of manipulating
reefs. The % cover of natural benthos (hard coral, dead coral, soft coral, algae, other) did
not differ with cleaner presence; but algal subtypes (calcareous, fleshy, and low, medium,
and high turf height) differed between sites. Algal height on settlement tiles (20 x 20 cm)
over 2 y did not differ with cleaner presence, but varied among times sampled - possibly
due to cyclonic events. When dried, algae plus detritus weight per tile decreased with
increasing sediment but did not differ with cleaner presence; sediment weight did not differ with cleaner presence. Video showed the grazer/detritivore Ctenochaetus striatusas the
most common large-bodied fish feeding off tiles, however many other fishes interacted
presence but did between sites - possibly explaining observed differences in feeding and
bite rates between sites. Tile composition and organic content, fish species composition
and video analysis is currently underway. The study reveals the challenges of detecting
potential indirect effects of fish and benthic interactions.


PHYSICAL DRIVERS OF COMMUNITY STRUCTURE AND GROWTH AMONG
(Abstract ID: 28834)
Mesophotic coral ecosystems (MCEs) are deep (>30m), light-dependent communities
that are abundant in the northern US Virgin Islands. Compared to their shallow water
counterparts, MCEs remain understudied. South of St. Thomas, mesophotic coral cover
on Orbicella-dominated reefs can reach 50%, but observations of the northern shelf
at similar depths (30-45 m) suggest limited coral cover. The cause and extent of these
differences is unknown. Using spatially explicit observations of coral health, species
abundances, and coral population densities, we compared northern shelf bank MCEs to
previously studied MCEs south of St. Thomas. Overall coral cover is lower on northern
MCEs and reefs dominated by Orbicella species have not been found. Factors limiting
coral growth on northern MCEs may include more frequent wave disturbance as well
as nutrient loading, turbidity, and thermal stress associated with upwelling. To assess if
disturbance and growth are driving community structure, we collected 30 colonies each
of Orbicella franksi and Porites astreoides from 27 to 47 m depths on the north and south
shelves of St. Thomas. Using CT to quantify calcification, we will identify environmental
factors correlated with coral growth across sites. We predict slower growth rates of mesophotic corals north of St. Thomas, corresponding to lower light conditions and more
frequent disturbance. These results will identify processes that influence the structure of
MCEs and, thus, help to predict their global distribution and utility as refugia.


SEEDING OF EARLY-STAGE SEXUAL RECRUITS OF ACROPORA PALMATA FOR
SPECIES AND HABITAT REHABILITATION (Abstract ID: 28790)


Populations of Acropora palmata , a keystone reef-building coral in the Caribbean, have
decreased significantly since the 1970s. Although some populations still spawn, no
significant recruitment of juveniles has been observed throughout the Caribbean, hence
rehabilitation of denuded reefs to aid recovery is urgently needed. Here, we present the
REproduction Seeding Unit, SECORE SU) on 120 m2 of degraded reef in Picudas, Puerto
Morelos, Mexico. Larvae for this assay were obtained in August 2015 after collecting
gametes from a spawning event in a nearby reef. The rehabilitation area was divided into
1 m width transects and SUs were wedged in natural crevices formed by the reef framework at a density of 4 SUs per m2 without the use of concrete or fixative. To evaluate SU

COMMUNITY PRODUCTION AND RESPIRATION IN AN EXTREME ENVIRONMENT: NEW INSIGHTS FROM TROPICAL TIDE-DOMINATED FRINGING REEFS
(Abstract ID: 29424)
The cycling of carbon and nutrients within benthic reef communities is driven by a suite
of environmental factors including water composition, hydrodynamic regime, temperature, and light. Although in the past most studies of reef biogeochemistry have focused
on wave-dominated systems, tide-dominated reefs are frequently found throughout the

130

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

ecosystems. Challenges for accurate remote sensing of coastal benthic (shallow water)
ecosystems and water quality are complicated by atmospheric scattering/absorption
(~80+% of the signal), sun glint from the sea surface, and water column scattering
dark targets as well as insufficient radiometric calibration thwart the value of coastal
remotely-sensed data. Atmospheric correction of satellite and airborne remotely-sensed
radiance data is crucial for deriving accurate water-leaving radiance in coastal waters.
C-HORSE seeks to optimize coastal remote sensing measurements by using a novel
airborne instrument suite that will bridge calibration, validation, and research capabilities
of bio-optical measurements from the sea to the high altitude remote sensing platform.
The primary goal of C-HORSE is to facilitate enhanced optical observations of coastal
ecosystems using state of the art portable microradiometers with 19 targeted spectral
channels and flight planning to optimize measurements further supporting current and
future remote sensing missions.

performance as well as recruit survival and growth, 60 quadrants were chosen randomly
and will be monitored for one year. Preliminary results show that two months after the
reduction in pre- and post-settlement care significantly decreases costs and labor.

A TRANSCRIPTOMIC PIPELINE TO UNDERSTAND THE SYMBIODINIUM COMMUNITY CHANGE AND FITNESS IN POCILLOPORA DAMICORNIS DURING
THERMAL STRESS (Abstract ID: 29679)


Since the proposition of the Adaptative Bleaching Hypothesis, stating that bleaching might allow corals to rapidly adapt to environmental change by modifying their
Symbiodinium community, research on the diversity and physiological properties of coral
symbionts has progressed significantly. However, the Symbiodinium assemblage of a given
coral colony has still rarely been assessed over a stress event and, when studied, the
molecular approaches to identify clades and subclades used the DNA of the holobiont
as a template. While such approaches yield fine-scale assessments of the clades hosted
by the corals, they do not allow for testing their fitness. To fill this gap, we developed a
transcriptomic analysis pipeline using the data issued from a time series performed on the
coral Pocillopora damicornisunder simulated thermal stress. Our analysis was based on one
issued from all available Symbiodinium DNA sequences, (2) selection of unique kmers
representative of each clade or subclade and (3) quantification of the markers’ expression
levels at each point of the stress test time series, by establishing clade and/or subclade/
coral host expression ratios. Our results will be discussed in terms of marker robustness
and the effects of thermal stress on Symbiodinium community change and fitness.

LONG-TERM MONITORING OF AN ASSEMBLAGE OF THE HOST ACTINIAN,
HETERACTIS MAGNIFICA, IN RAS MOHAMMAD NATIONAL PARK, SOUTH
SINAI, EGYPT (Abstract ID: 28680)
The coral reefs around Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, are under heavy pressure from tourists
and the dive sites are experiencing reduced growth and regeneration. An impressive
assemblage of the host actinian, Heteractis magnifica, commonly known as “Anemone
City”, is located in the Ras Mohammad National Park at the tip of the Sinai Peninsula.
The actinians are often located in clusters, which make Anemone City a special habitat
for the inherent Red Sea Anemone fish, Amphiprion bicinctus. The actinian assemblage
was monitored in 2002 and divided into 9 subpopulations on the reef. This study was
a re-monitoring and assessment of the development from 2002 to 2015. The actinians
were counted, mapped, classified as solitary or clustering and the area of oral disc was
measured. The number of adult and subadult anemone fish was counted in each subpopulation of actinians. The study reveals that the assemblage has not changed much
since 2002 in terms of total number of actinians, total actinian cover and number of
clusters. However the actinians in the subpopulations in the periphery areas of the reef
have in general increased their numbers, while they have decreased in the subpopulations at the central plateau. The amount of anemone fish has declined by 14 % for adults
and 29 % for subadults. The decline in anemone fish abundance has resulted in an average of 1 anemone fish per actinian and only 0,42 adult anemone fish per actinian, which
is highly unusual for an assemblage of host actinians. The findings are being discussed in
relation to the diving practices in the Sharm el-Sheikh area.


IMPROVING CAPACITY FOR CORAL REEF FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN MICRONESIA THROUGH SOCIAL MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (Abstract ID: 30136)
Over the past four years, Rare has supported local organizations and individuals in
undertaking social marketing campaigns for natural resource management through
its Micronesia Program for Island Resiliency. Within the context of this program, local
campaign managers were trained in behavior change and conservation strategies to enhance on-going efforts in improving coral reef fisheries and nearshore marine resource
management. At seven sites across the region and with the assistance of numerous supporting partners, managers conducted basic research; developed conservation strategies;
designed stakeholder and community engagement plans; and executed social marketing
campaigns to improve awareness, compliance, and behaviors that support effective coral
reef management. In many cases, managers equipped with new skills and tools were
able to organize communities, assimilate information from a variety of sources, build
and strengthen alliances of stakeholders and agencies, and improve compliance and
management efforts. Examples will be presented of how campaigns increased interaction, communication, and collaboration among scientists, fishers, managers, traditional
leaders, and politicians to undertake new initiatives that lead to improved management.
Details will be provided on how these efforts supported community-based MPA improvements, rights-based fishery management development, new policy and regulations,
increased compliance, and fish marketing enhancements that are intended to provide
benefits to fishers and contribute to overall fisheries sustainability.


THE ICRI GLOBAL CORAL ECOLOGICAL SERVICES AND FUNCTIONS VALUATION TOOL (Abstract ID: 28144 | Poster ID: 618)
The new International Coral Reef Initiative (ICRI) Coral Ecological Services and Functions tool was developed to account for the values inherent in different coral species of
different size classes that grow in different habitats and sub-habitats. The tool can be
used with any stony coral species worldwide and is easily adapted for any jurisdiction.
The coral ecological value (CEV) of corals found in nature is defined as the product of
individual values given to their morphology, rarity, endemism and size class with the
CEV-metric acting as a unit-less metric. The valuation tool itself is very simple and does
not require extensive knowledge beyond inputting a few variables: the species of coral
for each colony impacted along with its dominant growth form and rarity in your area;
the size of each colony impacted; and the type of sub-habitat (substrate) each colony
occurs on. Each of these is selected from pre-provided lists. The tool itself is very
transparent and provides guidance along each step as to what it is doing. The total coral
ecological value (CEV) is then simply tabulated as the product of each of the individual
metrics: The tool can be incorporated into any country’s natural resource trustee activities for evaluating impacts from human activities, and for establishing both restoration
and compensatory mitigation targets.



COASTAL HIGH-RESOLUTION OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING OF
ECOSYSTEMS (C-HORSE) (Abstract ID: 29966 | Poster ID: 539)
Coastal benthic marine ecosystems, such as coral reefs, seagrass beds, and kelp forests
are highly productive as well as ecologically and commercially important resources.
These systems are vulnerable to degraded water quality due to coastal development, terrestrial run-off, and harmful algal blooms. Measurements of these features are important
for understanding linkages with land-based sources of pollution and impacts to coastal

INTEGRATED CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT: EVALUATING A
COMMUNITY-BASED MARINE PROTECTED AREA PROJECT FOR EQUALITY
OF SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACTS (Abstract ID: 29227)

131

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


Despite the prevalence of protected areas, evidence of their impacts on people is weak
and remains hotly contested in conservation policy. A key question in this debate is
whether socioeconomic impacts vary according to social subgroup. Given that social
inequity can create conflict and impede poverty reduction, understanding how protected
areas can differently affect people is critical to designing them to achieve social and
biological goals. Here, we assessed whether the socioeconomic impacts of marine
protected areas – designed to achieve the dual goals of conservation and poverty
alleviation – differed according to age, gender or religion in associated villages in North
Sulawesi, Indonesia. Using data from pre-, mid- and post-implementation of the MPAs
for control and project villages, we found some empirical evidence that impacts on five
key socioeconomic indicators differed according to social subgroup. We found significant
inequality of impacts to environmental knowledge in relation to age and religion over the
medium and long term. These findings help elucidate the pathways through which the
impacts of the MPAs occurred, and may be used to improve targeting of management
activities. Further, our evaluation identified some key limitations of current approaches
to impact evaluation in relation to social equity, and thus provides guidance for future
research in understanding how protected areas affect people.


GLOBAL MICROBIALIZATION OF CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28248)
Microbialization refers to the observed shift in the trophic structure of ecosystems from
macrobes to microbes. The increased but less efficient microbial activity drives down
dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentrations depleting availability of these resources
to higher trophic levels. The posited mechanism for the observed microbialization is a
positive feedback loop, where DOC released by ungrazed fleshy algae fosters copiotrophic, potentially pathogenic bacteria, ultimately leading to coral disease and increased
algal competitive dominance (DDAM: DOC, Disease, Algae, Microbes). Here we provide
geochemical and microbiological evidence that microbialization is tightly coupled to
phase shifts in benthic reef communities on a global scale. Using an unprecedented
dataset of >400 samples on 60 coral reef sites in the Atlantic, Pacific, and the Indian
Ocean we show that increased algal cover correlates with lower concentrations of DOC
and higher microbial abundances. Metagenomes constructed from a subset of reefs
demonstrated a shift in microbial community metabolism away from efficient glycolysis
towards faster, but less efficient alternative catabolic pathways. Sacrificing energetic
efficiency to outgrow and deprive competitors of food is a common ecological strategy
referred to as the yield to power switch. This global dataset provides evidence that fleshy
algae foster, genomically adapted microbial communities that threaten reefs directly
through higher disease prevalence and by depleting oxygen and organic nutrients at the
expense of higher trophic levels.


DIVERGENCE THROUGH SPECIES INTERACTIONS: THE ROLE OF THE
SPONGE CLATHRIA OXEOTA IN ECOLOGICAL SPECIATION OF THE OCTOCORAL BRIAREUM ASBESTINUM (Abstract ID: 29445)
Environmental variation and competition for resources can trigger phenotypic change in
marine organisms. Thus life history traits such as growth rate, morphology, reproduction
and ecological interactions may be modified increasing fitness. Morphological variation,
if reinforced by divergent selection, may reduce gene flow and eventually lead to fixed
differences in ecologically segregated populations. Ecological, morphological and genetic
divergence between encrusting and erect morphotypes of the Caribbean octocoral Briareum asbestinum was studied in populations of Curaçao, Puerto Rico and Colombia. An
interspecific association was found between the encrusting morphotype -also known as
Oxidase I barcode. Furthermore, an overgrowing pattern affecting various species of
octocorals was consistently reported when such association was present, suggesting a
possible advantage for space competition. Genetic divergence was studied using the
method ‘fields for recombination’, which is useful in delimiting species boundaries based
on allelic exclusivity. Using the nuclear marker ITS2, an intermediate level of divergence,
morphological divergence and promotes genetic differences that potentially could be


STABLE MUCUS-ASSOCIATED MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES IN BLEACHED AND
NON-BLEACHED PORITES FROM THE ARABIAN SEAS (Abstract ID: 27888)
Coral reefs are subjected to a serious threat due to a phenomenon called coral bleaching,
which is described by the physical whitening of the coral colony due to loss of its endophotosymbiotic algae. While the importance of bacteria to coral holobiont functioning is
well established, there are comparatively few studies that studied bacterial communities
associated with coral mucus. A substantial number of the coral microbial community
resides within the mucus layer, however the effect of bleaching on the mucus-associated
microbial community is poorly understood. In this study, mucus from bleached and
healthy Porites colonies were collected from multiple reefs in the Red Sea and the Arabian
Gulf in order to investigate microbial changes associated with health condition and site.
Using 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, we found that microbial richness and composition was similar in bleached and healthy colonies, but differed by site. Our data show
that bacterial taxa composition of coral mucus seems to be stable and almost unaffected
by bleaching emphasizing the ephemeral nature of coral mucus. The notion that distinct
bacterial taxa structure the microbiomes of Porites in the Red Sea and the Arabian Gulf
indicate that prevailing environmental conditions might be a strong driver of coral mucus
bacteria seem to be site-specifically affected. Further research is needed to unequivocally
resolve the distinct contribution of this group of bacterial to coral bleaching.


ID: 28883)
The lion fish ( Pterois volitans ) has been responsible for one of the most successful and
fast invasions of the Atlantic. Since its first apparition in the 90’s in Florida, the scientists
predicted that its dispersion would spread all over the east coast of the American
continent. And in fact, this lionfish has invaded coastal seascapes from New York to
Brazil. Due to its rapid dispersion, this lionfish could be an extraordinary tracker of
connectivity in general and more specifically among marine protected areas in the Gulf
of Mexico (GM) and the Grand Caribbean (GC). To further explore this relationship, a
total of 475 samples were collected and identified by mtDNA as Pterois volitans . They
were subsequently characterized with 12 microsatellite markers. Genetic analyses reflect
a structured distribution suggesting restricted connectivity among marine protected
areas with the GC appearing more isolated and differentiated. The Bayesian clustering
analysis showed that individuals pertain to four genetic groups, suggesting that currents
and topography patterns play an important role in the distribution of the allelic frequency
of this specie. These results also indicate that the GC and GM groups might issued from
two different roads of invasion. This results are important for management populations
of coral reef fish, because even though this species is invasive with a successful breeding


WHO MAKES THE SETTLEMENT CUE FOR LARVAE OF THE CORALIVOROUS
NUDIBRANCH PHESTILLA SIBOGAE? (Abstract ID: 28981)
When larvae of the nudibranch Phestilla sibogae are exposed to seawater (SW) in which
pieces of the nudibranch’s prey coral, Porites compressa, have been soaked, they settle
and metamorphose. The inducer is a small (<500 DA) polar molecule. Knowing that
any hermatypic coral is a community of coral, symbiotic dinoflagellates, bacteria, and
probably fungi, we here ask, which partner makes the settlement inducer? This study attempts to eliminate all but one of the possible sources. To eliminate the dinoflagellate as
a source, live coral pieces were maintained in full darkness for 5 dy, with daily transfers
shutdown in photosynthesis, the inducer was still present. Maintaining coral in the dark
in the presence of the photosynthesis inhibitor DCMU also failed to reduce induction,

132

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Three deliberative group discussion methods, namely Planning Cells, Focus Group Discussions and Musyawarah, were employed in three different locations on Sulawesi. The
outcomes of these exercises revealed that the majority of the threats in these areas are
anthropogenic. Destructive and illegal fishing activities are still occurring as the result of
limited monitoring and low level of law enforcement. To improve coral reef ecosystem
and its management, the participants proposed to improve community awareness and
participation, to increase the effectiveness of monitoring and law enforcement, and to
implement an accepted fisheries management regulation.

further reducing the likelihood that dinoflagellates make the inducer. To examine a role
for bacteria in production of the inducer, corals were steeped in SW containing one of
seven different antibiotics, representing five different modes of action, and the resulting
SW tested for induction. All preparations remained strongly inductive. Although SW
containing fungicides to which corals had been exposed killed the larvae, fungi isolated
and cultured from the coral produced no soluble settlement inducer. Thus, results to
date support the hypothesis that it is the coral itself whose metabolite is the inducer of
recruitment of its nudibranch predator.



REFLECTIONS ON MODERN AND HISTORIC APPROACHES TO MAPPING
CORAL REEF ENVIRONMENTS AT ALDABRA ATOLL (Abstract ID: 29025)

PLASTICITY OF SEA ANEMONES ALONG VOLCANIC PH GRADIENTS (Abstract
ID: 29497)

In February 2009, a team from Cambridge Coastal Research Unit embarked on an
expedition to map the lagoon of Aldabra Atoll, western Indian Ocean. Here, we reflect
on the modern and historical mapping techniques applied across the lagoon and atoll
rim. Ground referencing was conducted from a boat to support the production of a
lagoon map from three high resolution satellite remote sensing images. Topographic
surveys were undertaken with a level and staff to accurately determine the height of a
tide gauge deployed in a lagoon channel in relation to a control point some 1.5 km away.
Our experiences highlight the changing nature of field survey techniques, in particular
the amount of effort required to record observations for the purpose of mapping. The
broader value of maps as important sources of time-specific information on the configuration of landforms such as coral reef platforms and islands is considered using a range
of case studies from the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans. These explore the ways in
which David Stoddart’s maps have been used to assess shoreline movements at Diego
Garcia, to validate models of island response to environmental change on the Great
Barrier Reef and to assess changes to mangrove environments on the Belize cays. These
examples illustrate the importance of the many reef platform and cay maps that are part
of the legacy of David Stoddart’s reef geographical expeditions.

Natural CO2 vents are recognized as in situ study sites to understand effects of ocean
acidification on marine organisms and there is evidence that non-calcifying Cnidarians
proliferate in these environments. The symbiotic anemone Anemonia viridis and the
non-symbiotic anemone Actinia equinaare prevalent at all pH sites around the CO2 vent
found at Levante Bay (Vulcano, NE Sicily, Italy). The aim of our study was to determine
if these species are highly plastic or if they are acclimated to each pH site, as well as to
viridis). To answer this, short term translocation experiments were performed, examining
physiological response when organisms from one pH environment were exposed to other pH environments. Anemones were translocated from low (7.4), mid (7.6), high (8.1),
and reference (8.1 – outside of volcanic area) to each pH environment and exposed for
and did not change when exposed to other pH environments. Low variability in translocation response indicates plasticity in both of these organisms along pH gradients.



WHY DO CORAL REEFS THRIVE IN ICEHOUSE WORLD CLIMATES? CLUES
FROM LARGER BENTHIC FORAMINIFERS (Abstract ID: 28698 | Poster ID: 292)

PHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES AND DIFFERENTIAL MORTALITY OF THE SEA
ANEMONE EXAIPTASIA PALLIDA TO LONG TERM OCEAN ACIDIFICATION AND
A SIMULATED TEMPERATURE ANOMOLY (Abstract ID: 29659 | Poster ID: 416)

In the past 25 years, foraminifers that host algal endosymbionts (aka large benthic forams
or LBF) have become widely used as bioindicators for carbonate-depositional environments, both fossil and modern. This is particularly true for Amphistegina, which is nearly
circumtropical in modern oceans and has a long fossil record. They exhibit bleaching,
induced by photo-oxidative stress similar to bleaching in zooxanthellate (Z-) corals,
though responding more directly to photic stress. Yet though Z-corals have declined
dramatically on the offshore reefs of Florida, LBF have continued to thrive in the clearest
offshore habitats. The highest coral cover is now on patch reefs, where LBF populations tend to be low or highly variable. The Cenozoic fossil record provides clues to this
divergence. During the Eocene, when global temperatures and atmospheric CO2 were
higher than pre-Industrial modern levels, LBF were important producers of carbonate
buildups; Z-corals typically occupied mesophotic conditions, either deeper or at reduced
water transparency. A long-recognized paradox of Z-corals is that, despite requiring
warm-water to thrive and build substantial reefs, coral reefs became prominent with the
onset of Icehouse World climates. By their production of calcite rather than aragonite,
and by hosting a diversity of symbiont taxa, the LBF provide additional models of
how organisms with potential to hypercalcify respond to environmental conditions and
especially to changes in the suites of conditions, useful to the study of reefs in the past,
present and future.

Recent experimental and natural studies note positive outcomes of high CO2 exposure
for symbiotic sea anemones. Yet, as with scleractinian corals, the majority of data comes
from short-term, single parameter studies. We quantified physiological responses of
cycling, high CO2 (1010-733 ppm, 111 days), combined with a simultaneous thermal
increase to 32 C (5 days). Photosynthesis to respiration (P:R) ratios increased under high
CO2 in animals hosting two different strains of Symbiodinium type A4, but declined
under combined heat and high CO2. P:R in animals with Symbiodinium minutum (B1)
showed minimal change to CO2 and an earlier decline with combined heating. Levels
of photodamage, bleaching and mortality under the combined heating/CO2 treatment
were significantly higher in anemones hosting B1 than A4. Similar to previous results
with a clonal host line, asexual reproduction under high CO2 increased markedly in
animals hosting B1, but only within the first month of exposure, while those hosting the
A4 symbionts displayed minimal change in reproduction due to CO2 exposure. Among
juvenile anemones, those hosting B1 displayed the greatest mortality with heating, while
less, yet differential, mortality was noted between anemones hosting the A4 symbionts.
While clonal animals reveal some effects of high CO2, our data provide evidence that
the positive effects of increased CO2 on symbiotic sea anemones might not persist in an
environment characterized by stochastic high-temperature anomalies.



PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT IN CORAL REEF MANAGEMENT, THE RESULT OF
THREE CITIZEN PARTICIPATORY APPROACHES CONDUCTED IN SULAWESI,
INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 27964)
require a creative and transparent decision-making process that accommodates a
diversity of needs, forms of knowledge and human values. A growing body of research
has shown the need for public involvement in any environmental management effort,
including the management of coral reefs. This paper reports the results of three different
public deliberation exercises centering on coral reef management in Sulawesi, Indonesia.

RESHUFFLING OF GLOBAL MARINE BIODIVERSITY UNDER CLIMATE
CHANGE (Abstract ID: 27993)

133

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Anticipating the effect of climate change on biodiversity, in particular on changes in
community composition, is crucial for adaptive ecosystem management but remains a
critical knowledge gap. We use climate velocity trajectories, together with information
on thermal tolerances and habitat preferences, to project changes in global patterns
of marine species richness and community composition under IPCC Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) 4.5 and 8.5. Our simple, intuitive approach emphasizes climate connectivity, and enables us to model over 12 times as many species as
previous studies. We find that range expansions prevail over contractions for both RCPs
through the year 2100, producing a net local increase in richness globally, and changes
in composition driven by the redistribution rather than loss of diversity. These invasions
homogenize present-day communities across multiple regions. High extirpation rates
are expected regionally, particularly in the tropics (for example, Indo-Pacific) and under
RCP8.5, leading to strong decreases in richness and likely creation of novel communities
where invasions are common. The overlap of these patterns with contemporary human
impacts highlights where current action can help promote resilience to climate change.
These results strongly suggest that conservation plans based on current global marine
diversity patterns will likely fail in the long run.

Many coral predators remove coral tissue, leaving small areas of exposed coral skeleton.
While the effects of scar shape and size on tissue regeneration are known, the effect
of spatial distribution of scars on healing, growth and morphology is still unknown.
Polyps share nutrients with their neighbors, and thus, scar distribution likely affects
recovery from damage, as well as contributes to variation in morphology due to differing calcification rates during recovery. To determine the effects of damage patterns
on coral response, we conducted several studies in Moorea, French Polynesia: 1) field
surveys documenting the spatial distribution of scars on corals, 2) field experiments
testing the effect of the distance between scars on coral tissue healing, skeletal growth,
and morphology, and 3) field surveys relating predator (corallivorous snail) presence to
coral morphology and linear extension. These studies show scars were located close
to one another and coral tissue regeneration was highest in scars >25 mm from each
other, although skeletal growth is lowest. Additionally, scars near one another reduced
linear extension a year later, while corals with scars far apart showed no difference in
growth from control corals. Finally, corallivorous snails were associated with lower rates
of skeletal growth and bumpier areas of the colony. These results suggest clustered coral
damage has a greater effect on coral growth and recovery from damage than damage
spread throughout the colony and could contribute to topographically diverse reefs.



REPRODUCTIVE PERIODICITY OF BROODING CORAL SPECIES IN SOUTHWESTERN PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29186)

POPULATION STRUCTURE OF THE CORAL, AGARICIA LAMARCKI FROM SW

Understanding the reproductive biology of corals is critical to the management and
conservation of coral reefs. Sexual reproduction is important to the recovery and
persistence of corals. Data on the sexual reproduction of corals in Southwestern Philippines are lacking. Here, we report the first documentation of the lunar and diel timing
of planulation of three brooding coral species: Pocillopora damicornis, Seriatopora
caliendrum and Porites cylindrica in Bongao, Tawi-Tawi. We monitored the planulation
of these corals from August 2014 to September 2015. All three species released larvae
the lunar phase but more planulae were released around the last quarter moon and
0300 to 0700 h, and 2000 to 0200 h respectively. Our findings on timing of planulation
will facilitate expanded research on these species.

Drastic declines in coral abundance and health have been documented worldwide within
the past few decades, threats to these ecosystems range from both local and global inputs.
Shallow coral reefs are highly affected, conversely, deeper reefs below ~30 meters, otherwise known as mesophotic coral ecosystems (MCEs) remain relatively healthy. The Deep
Reef Refugia Hypothesis (DRRH) has been proposed to test if MCEs might be acting as
larval resources for the highly impacted shallow reefs, although a bulk of contemporary
studies suggests a lack of gene flow between shallow and deep reefs across many coral
taxa. However, within southwestern Puerto Rico plating corals, Agaricia spp., displays
both a wide depth distribution, aids significantly in reef growth and habitat formation and
encompasses several species and related taxa, yet no specific population information is
(USVI). By using single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) generated by double digestion
restriction site associated DNA sequencing (ddRAD), we will be testing the DRRH, as well
as infer levels of gene flow from both local and distant populations across the PR and
USVI platform. Information from this investigation will be used to aid managers in establishing effective Marine Protected Areas and highlighting reefs with high genetic diversity.



DO SMALL SCALES MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE? UNRAVELING THE INFLUENCE
OF RECENT THERMAL HISTORY ON CORAL BLEACHING SUSCEPTIBILITY AT
DAILY AND WEEKLY TIME-SCALES (Abstract ID: 29582)

HYPERSTABILITY MASKS DECLINES IN BUMPHEAD PARROTFISH (BOLBOMETOPON MURICATUM) POPULATIONS (Abstract ID: 28455)
Bolbometopon muricatum, the largest species of parrotfish, is a functionally important
species that is characterised by the formation of aggregations for foraging, reproductive and sleeping behaviours. The locations of aggregations are often known to local
fishers and therefore vulnerable to overfishing, and are likely to exhibit hyperstability, the
maintenance of high catch per unit effort (CPUE) while population abundance declines.
In this study we provide a clear demonstration of hyperstable dynamics in a commercial
underwater visual census (UVC) and CPUE surveys across these zones over a 21 month
period in 2012-2013. The individual sites for replicate UVC surveys were selected using
a generalized random tessellation stratified variable probability design, while CPUE surveys involved trained provincial fisheries officers and local spearfishermen. A comparison of fishery independent abundance data and fisheries dependent CPUE data indicate
muricatum spear fisheries across the pacific, and highlight the limitations of data-poor
fisheries assessment methods for evaluating the status of commercially valuable coral
reef fishes that form predicable aggregations.

Recent thermal history plays a critical role in coral susceptibility to bleaching. Degree
Heating Weeks and large-scale remote sensing products can accurately predict bleaching episodes across oceanic-scales. However, there is often a mismatch between these
metrics and small-scale geographic and temporal variability during local bleaching
events. In an effort to reconcile regional predictions with local patterns of variability, we
performed a high-resolution examination of the influence of recent thermal history on
coral bleaching susceptibility of Porites lobata and Goniastrea retiformis on Ofu Island,
American Samoa. Clonal replicate nubbins from multiple colonies of each species were
transplanted from a source site with moderate temperature variability to 3 sites representing low, moderate, and high temperature variability. After acclimation to contrasting
conditions, individuals from each site were assayed for thermal tolerance five times (after
six months and six months plus 2, 7, 14 and 18 days). Multivariate analyses will be used
to explore the influence of fine-scale thermal history on the bleaching susceptibility
of these species. We aim to reveal temporal differences in coral thermal tolerance by
exploiting the natural variability of Ofu Island’s nearshore environments.


SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF DAMAGE AFFECTS CORAL TISSUE REGENERATION, SKELETAL GROWTH, AND MORPHOLOGY (Abstract ID: 28732)

134

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

tion on the variability of the spectral signatures are used to enhance the identification
process. We propose that the UHI technology represents an efficient and high-quality
tool for future environmental mapping and monitoring.

SLIM, A HIGH-RESOLUTION MULTI-PURPOSE DISPERSAL MODELING TOOL
FOR THE GREAT BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 28320)
High-resolution ocean circulation models are required to simulate the complex and
multi-scale currents that drive physical connectivity between marine ecosystems. However, standard coastal ocean models rarely achieve a spatial resolution of less than 1km
over the >100km spatial scale of dispersion processes. Here we use the high-resolution
unstructured-mesh coastal ocean model SLIM that locally achieves a spatial resolution
of ~100m over the scale of the entire Great Barrier Reef (GBR). Using such a highresolution model allows us to simulate the classical cascade from large-scale to smallscales, but also a feedback from the small-scale to the large-scale. By coupling SLIM
with a biophysical model of larval dispersal we can track the position of virtual larvae
or propagules released into the simulated domain. Connectivity matrices are then generated from the positions of the particles at the start and at the end of the simulations.
Useful information can be extracted from these large matrices by using graph theory
tools such as community detection, page rank, influence rank and HITS algorithms.
These methods are illustrated for different applications including connectivity between
submerged and near-sea-surface coral reefs, dispersion of seagrass propagules and
crown-of-thorns starfish outbreaks. Our study suggests that combining a high-resolution
ocean model with novel graph theory algorithms is a powerful tool for studying physical
connectivity between marine ecosystems and informing management decisions.


CAN CORAL REEFS AND LARGE-SCALE DREDGING PROJECTS COEXIST?
(Abstract ID: 28986)
Port expansion projects throughout the tropics have created a conflict between ports,
environmentalists, regulators, and the public. Various reports from some projects show
extreme impacts while others show little or none. Which is correct? Are there BMPs
that can be employed to minimize impacts? When impacts do occur, are they expected
and reasonable? And finally, can they be restored or mitigated? Using case studies, we
highlight factors that work! The lessons learned from earlier projects show that the best
course of action is the careful preparation and vetting of a pre-project environmental
assessment that allows for a description and quantification of all anticipated impacts.
This assessment should detail avoidance and minimization options as well as protective
measures to assure for environmental permit compliance. During construction, quantitative monitoring of key biotic and abiotic parameters need to be performed so that corrective adaptive management measures can be employed mid-stream. It is imperative
that monitoring programs carefully employ far-field controls for comparison. In addition,
a spatially and temporally appropriate monitoring protocol should be employed to detect
impacts in real-time. Finally, to make the public whole for any impacts, there is a need
for restoration of injured resources and mitigation to offset those that are lost/displaced
during construction. Through all project phases, open transparent communication
between stakeholders is necessary to resolve conflicts between the various groups, many
with disparate goals and interests.


DECOUPLING OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND EXTRACELLULAR SUPEROXIDE PRODUCTION BY CORALS AND THEIR SYMBIONTS (Abstract ID: 29633 | Poster ID: 86)


The reactive oxygen species (ROS) superoxide has been implicated in both beneficial
and detrimental effects in cnidarian corals, ranging from pathogenic disease resistance
to coral bleaching. At present, heat-induced impairment of photosynthetic electron
transport in Symbiodinium is considered the primary process responsible for ROS
production in symbiotic corals. Nevertheless, there exists a paucity of studies directly
measuring ROS, including superoxide, in corals and their symbionts. Here, we quantified
in situ extracellular superoxide levels at the surfaces of Porites astreoides in aquaria and
a natural bleaching event in Hawaii. Our results demonstrate high in situ concentrations
of superoxide at the surface of pigmented and bleached corals that were not correlated
withSymbiodinium abundance or significantly different over a diel cycle. Given the
inability for superoxide to cross biological membranes, this superoxide is attributed to
the activity of external bacterial symbionts or coral animal itself. Further, diel extracellular superoxide production by Porites-derived symbionts, including Symbiodinium and
Endozoicomonas, were found to be light-independent, indicating that this production
was decoupled from photosynthetic activity. These findings highlight the need to obtain
discrete measurements of ROS in the coral holobiont to define the sources, regulation,
and consequences of these species to coral health.

MODELLING AND MAPPING FISHING PRESSURE AND FISH STANDING
STOCKS ACROSS MICRONESIA, AND ASSESSING THE POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF
CLIMATE CHANGE (Abstract ID: 28495)


Reef fisheries are vital to Micronesian economies, but are threatened by over-exploitation and other stressors. As part of The Nature Conservancy’s Mapping Ocean
Wealth project, we assembled a database of 1127 fish surveys across five jurisdictions
of Micronesia to model and map fishing pressure and current standing stocks. Using
mean parrotfish size as an indicator of fishing pressure and controlling for biophysical
gradients, we demonstrate that fishing is best predicted by distance to the nearest port
and human population pressure within 200 km. This metric of fishing pressure and
biophysical variables were then used to model standing stock. Standing stock increased
with increasing oceanic productivity, upstream larval supply, depth, and coral cover, and
decreased with increasing sea surface temperature and fishing pressure. The models
were then used to predict fishing pressure and current standing stock across all reefs in
the study area, providing the first continuous maps of these variables for Micronesia.
Furthermore, we mapped potential gains in standing stock that might be obtained in
no-take reserves by simulating zero fishing pressure. The ratio of current to potential
standing stock also generated spatially explicit estimates of fisheries status and potential
time to recovery. Finally, the models also provide insights into the impacts of rising sea
surface temperatures that are expected to alter fish distributions and reduce body size.
These maps and models are important regional resources to inform policy and aid
protected area design and fisheries management.

UNDERWATER HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING OF A COLD-WATER CORAL REEF
(Abstract ID: 28373)
Cold-water coral reefs have a wide range of ecological functions. Large-scale mapping
of the reefs is resource demanding. The standard method of visual seabed mapping
today involves video transects and still imagery, which is a proven, yet time consuming
and subjective method. A more robust and objective method is needed to improve the
efficiency in benthic habitat mapping for better management. Underwater Hyperspectral
Imager (UHI) utilizes high spectral resolution of the visible light reflected from objects
on the seafloor to automatically identify Objects of Interest (OOI). A custom-made
software including a spectral library containing optical fingerprints of a range of OOI’s
are used together with classification algorithms, for automated sea floor identification.
The aim of this work was to demonstrate UHI-mapping of a coral reef and to optimize
the classification algorithms for the reef-building coral Lophelia pertusa. Coral reefs in
Norwegian waters was mapped with UHI mounted on a remotely operated vehicle. The
were identified. Maps of the distribution of the organisms are visualized in GIS format.

135

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

com


DETERMINING THE HYDRODYNAMIC CONDITIONS REQUIRED TO DEPOSIT
CYCLONE LINKED BOULDER DEPOSITS IN THE SOUTHERN GREAT BARRIER
REEF (Abstract ID: 29366 | Poster ID: 389)
Cyclones are potentially catastrophic events for coral reefs that can result in widespread
loss of coral cover and biodiversity. Large reef-derived boulders have been used to reconstruct the effects of extreme events on coral reefs and are crucial to our understanding of cyclone events on coral reef structural diversity, geomorphic change, and coral
cover. Previous studies linking large coral boulders to cyclones often do not evaluate the
specific hydrodynamic processes required to produce such deposits. This is an important
knowledge gap since establishing a greater understanding of the hydrodynamic conditions required to deposit coral boulders will allow for more accurate predictions of
coral reef change during high energy storm or cyclone events. In this study, we revisit
boulders that have been linked to cyclone events on Heron and One Tree Reefs. The
hydrodynamic conditions required to break, transport, and deposit the boulders on the
reef flats were calculated by using a number of scenarios and transport models from
previous studies of cyclone deposited boulders on coral reefs and rock platforms. We
find that contrary to previous assumptions the boulders on Heron and One Tree Reefs
could have been deposited during storm events on the east coast of Australia and do
not necessarily require cyclonic conditions for transport and deposition. We also find
this interpretation with attached boulders requiring waves generated by cyclones to be
transported onto reef flats.

WHALE SHARK KINSHIP AND GENETICS: INVESTIGATING TWO POPULATIONS WITH DIFFERENT ECOLOGIES (Abstract ID: 29548)
Juvenile whale sharks are known to aggregate near coral reefs, usually due to high food
availability, at several locations globally. A recent global study of whale shark population
genetics has allowed for better understanding of genetic connections between aggregations in both the Indo-Pacific and Atlantic. This overview included an aggregation found
within the Red Sea near Al Lith, Saudi Arabia; however, the Mafia Island, Tanzania, aggregation was not part of the study. The ecological behavior of these aggregations differs
with the Saudi Arabian individuals showing strong seasonality, while acoustic telemetry
data revealed cryptic residency at Mafia Island. Genetic analysis using microsatellite
markers was performed on both populations, using a combination of primers sourced
from previous studies and other newly developed primers to compare individuals within
each population between seasons. The Red Sea population was compared between 5
seasons spanning 6 years from 2010-2015. The Tanzanian population was compared
for 2 field seasons from 2012-2014. Genetic diversity was analyzed using allelic richness
for 5 seasons in the Red Sea with no significant change seen. Contrasting to other
whale shark aggregations allelic richness in the Red Sea shows no sign of reduction.
Finally, kinship was analyzed for both aggregations, with two potential sibling pairs at
the Tanzanian aggregation, but no possible sibling pairs within the Red Sea. This result
suggests that the dissimilarity between the aggregations might not lead to differences in
population relatedness.
http://Red_Sea_and_Tanzania_whale_sharks


PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE: INCORPORATING GLOBAL AND LOCAL SCALE DATA
TO HELP MANAGERS PRIORITIZE CONSERVATION EFFORTS (Abstract ID: 28623)
Most managers seek to reduce reef vulnerability to climate change, but in the face of
both global and local stressors, how should managers prioritize conservation efforts?
We present one of the first examples of using a vulnerability assessment to prioritize
efforts to reduce climate vulnerability. For twelve MPAs in Indonesia, we combined 1)
state-of-art downscaled (4-km) climate model projections of bleaching conditions, 2)
maps of anthropogenic stress, and 3) ecological monitoring data. These data cover both
vulnerability components: exposure and resilience. In collaboration with local managers,
we created a matrix of action options to aid in prioritizing conservation efforts. Sites that
are high priorities have both low projected thermal stress and high resilience potential.
At the other end of the scale are ‘sacrificial’ low priority sites that are already in poor
condition and are projected to have high future stress. Between these extremes, our
options matrix highlights and identifies specific sites where local conservation efforts are
likely to have the biggest impact achieving specific MPA objectives. This is among the
first vulnerability assessments to combine downscaled climate model projections with
ecological monitoring data, an approach which can be replicated in other areas where
managers face the familiar challenge of using limited conservation resources in the face
of rapid global change and uncertainty. It is essential that local communities have the
tools to easily and accurately assess tradeoffs in conservation efforts.


POLEWARD-SHIFT OF CORALS: TRANSPLANT EXPERIMENT OF JUVENILES
FROM SUBTROPICAL TO TEMPERATE REEFS IN JAPAN (Abstract ID: 29426)
Recently, ocean warming causes poleward-shift or expansion of some corals from
tropical/subtropical to temperate regions. In this case, coral larvae should be able to
reach new locations and successfully settle, however no information is available on
how tropical coral juveniles survive after settlement in temperate regions. Juveniles of
many corals are known to acquire symbiotic algae, Symbiodinium from the environment.
Establishment of symbiosis is important for the survival and growth of the early stage
corals. However, in a poleward expansion situation, it is likely that the environmental
symbiont community at the settlement location will differ from this in the original reef.
Here, we examine the potential of subtropical coral juveniles to settle and initiate growth
in a temperate reef in Japan. We used in situ transplant of acroporid corals to measure
size and survival, and also genotyped Symbiodinium of the juveniles. The species studied
are either known to be already expanding their distribution to the north or not. Interestingly, no major differences in survival and growth could be observed between expanding
and non-expanding species 3 months after settlement. Symbionts of adult corals were all
identical, whereas various types were found in juveniles from both locations and differed
more between locations rather than between species. This confirms that coral juveniles
acquire multiple symbiont types depending on the local environments where they settle
and change over time instead of species-specific symbiont acquisition.


THE ROLE OF MARINE PROTECTED AREAS IN THE REPLENISHMENT OF LOCAL FISHERIES (Abstract ID: 28137)
The precarious state of many coastal marine ecosystems has prompted the use of marine protected areas (MPAs) as a tool for management and conservation. However, the
effectiveness of MPA networks is contingent upon our understanding of the processes
that affect population dynamics. Since coral reefs are a naturally patchy and fragmented
environment, the degree of connectivity between discrete populations is critical to the
persistence of populations and by extension, the subsistence of local fisheries. We com-

136

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

plate corals, fish densities are low compared to other mesophotic reefs. The exceptions
to this are the pits which red grouper excavate throughout the area. These pits form high
rugosity rock habitat which act as small biodiversity hotspots. ROV dives were conducted annually at Pulley Ridge from 2012 to 2015 to characterize grouper pits, examine their
importance to the ecosystem, and determine the impact of lionfish invasion on their
species composition. Approximately 66% of red grouper and 71% of lionfish observed
were associated with a pit. Juveniles and small fish species were also associated with the
excavations, particularly those that contained red grouper and/or lionfish compared to
pits with neither species present. Lionfish and red grouper abundances both increased
between 2012 and 2014 and then decreased in 2015 while abundance of juveniles and
small fish displayed the exact opposite trend. PRIMER analyses also indicate that fish
species assemblages were distinct among pits depending on red grouper and/or lionfish
presence. Future analyses will compare fish assemblages from the current data with
those conducted in 2008 & 2009, before the lionfish invasion, to examine the impact this
species has on the ecosystem.

pare observed patterns of larval dispersal over successive years for two exploited species of coral reef fish in the Keppel Islands, Great Barrier Reef. We combine parentage
analysis with emergent analytical tools in graph theory to determine the consistency of
larval export from a small network of no-take MPAs to nearby fished areas. Further, we
test the old adage that bigger, older and fatter fish make the greatest contribution to the
replenishment of fished populations, and provide empirical evidence for the relationship
between fish size and local reproductive success. Our findings give important insight into
the mechanisms shaping connectivity patterns in coral reef fish and the role of no-take
MPAs in the replenishment of local fisheries.

LARGE-SCALE MASS CORAL LARVAL RESEEDING ENHANCES CORAL RECRUITMENT FOR REEF RESTORATION (Abstract ID: 28587)


Scleractinian reef corals are foundation species on coral reefs but are increasingly
threatened by chronic anthropogenic stressors interacting with natural perturbations,
resulting in the degradation of coral and reef communities in many reef regions globally.
Coral populations are naturally resilient through sexual reproduction and recruitment
of juveniles and can recover from many natural disturbances given sufficient time
and absence of large or chronic disturbances. However, where larval supply is limited,
natural recruitment rates may be too slow or variable to restore coral populations within
appropriate timescales, therefore active restoration processes need to be considered.
Synchronous coral spawning events provide access to millions of larvae that can be
used for mass larval rearing and settlement on degraded but recoverable reef areas.
Most previous larval ‘reseeding’ studies have been done using small enclosures, whereas
large-scale active interventions are needed to be ecologically meaningful. This study uses
larger-scale mesh enclosures to contain millions of coral larvae after spawning during
their embryo and larval development and subsequent settlement period on degraded
reef areas in the northwestern Philippines. Use of large-scale mesh enclosures to rear
millions of coral larvae combined with in situ settlement can significantly enhance initial
settlement rates and stimulate coral recruitment on degraded but recoverable reef areas,
thereby initiating reef restoration.

MOLECULAR MODIFICATIONS IN CORAL REEF TAXA AND THE METABOLOMIC RULES OF COMMUNITY ASSEMBLY (Abstract ID: 28788)
Lipid-based molecules are fundamental building blocks of life on Earth. In addition to
providing structure, lipids are involved in processes ranging from intracellular signaling to inter-organismal defense. Many physiological processes are activated by the
constant fluctuation in atomic composition of parent molecules gives rise to exceptional
molecular diversity and reflects physiological changes within an organism, both of which
we captured using a novel metabolomics approach. Metabolomes, comprised primarily
of lipids, were extracted from 235 samples of benthic reef taxa. Samples were analyzed
using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry followed by molecular networking to connect related molecules and identify modifications. Our data demonstrate
that reef corals, sponges, tunicates, and algae exhibit distinct molecular modification
capacities within and among taxonomic groups. In particular, taxa exhibit unique patterns of lipid methylation, acetylation, and phosphorylation. To better understand the
ecological consequences of distinct modification capacities, we are determining how
modification patterns are altered by benthic competition and whether these changes
reflect competitive outcomes. The extent to which organisms differ in their capacity to
modify molecules reflects the suite of functions they possess, thus our approach provides a robust way to examine whole-organism physiology within ecological frameworks
such as the competition for benthic space.


CORAL REPRODUCTION AND RECRUITMENT ON A HIGH-LATITUDE REEF IN
SOUTH AFRICA: RESILIENCE IN THE YOUNG? (Abstract ID: 29610 | Poster ID: 373)
The sexual reproduction and recruitment of corals, key processes in the maintenance and
resilience of coral communities, are understudied on the marginal high-latitude reefs in
South Africa. Furthermore, the impact of increasing water temperature and acidity on the
early life stages of corals warrants investigation to establish how these corals may respond
to predicted climate change. In this study, gravid colonies of two representative coral
species, Hydnophora exesa and Acropora austera ,were collected from Two-mile Reef at
Sodwana Bay (-27° S, 32° E) and spawned in the laboratory. Gametes were used to assess
how increased water temperature and acidity (as predicted by the IPCC) would affect the
fertilization, embryonic development, and recruit growth rates of these two species. Increased water temperature and acidity negatively influenced the early life stages of these
and recruit growth still occurred under predicted climate change conditions. This study is
the first to investigate the influence of increasing sea temperature and ocean acidification
on the early life stages of corals on the high-latitude reefs of South Africa. Determining
whether recruitment rates experienced during increased water temperature and acidity
are sufficient to maintain reef resilience remains to be quantified.


ID: 28781)
Vibrio coralliilyticus is a bacterial pathogen of both corals and shellfish larvae that is
currently difficult to detect and manage. Commercial shellfish hatcheries are frequently
experiencing dramatic losses due to vibriosis and we have developed a novel lateral
facilities. However, as the organism is also known to cause severe disease in corals and
we are now exploring the possibility of utilizing this test as a coral disease diagnostic
tool. The test is a rapid LFA that can measure extremely low levels of a protein toxic
We report here that the LFA test can measure VcpA levels as low as 5 ng/ml, which is
20-fold lower than the level of VcpA that causes noticeable mortality of shellfish larvae
in the laboratory. LFAs are simple and easy to perform (home pregnancy test kits are
common examples) and do not require any external instrumentation other than an
eyedropper to apply several drops of sample to the sample port. Readout is visual and
can be qualitative (plus/minus) or quantitative, as the signal strength is proportional to
the amount of antigen present in the sample. We anticipate that this test will provide a
useful tool for coral disease diagnostics as it provides real-time, on-site, early detection
of bacterial presence.


FISH ASSEMBLAGES ASSOCIATED WITH RED GROUPER PITS AT PULLEY
Pulley Ridge is a series of drowned barrier islands on the southwest Florida Shelf and
at Pulley Ridge are unique in that they comprise a mixture of shallow water and deep
species. With the majority of the ridge being low rugosity habitat comprised of algae and

137

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


with the number of the hosts which in turn was highly correlated with the total area of
reefs. A stereoscope was used to detect 3D reefs using high resolution aerial photographs.
The total area of detected 3D reefs was not correlated with the number of the hosts, but
the total area of reefs observed in photographs as dark colors was highly correlated with
the number of hosts. Field observations revealed that dark colors indicated reefs (>0.5 m
in height; 0.25 m in diameter), and the upper sections of large 3D reefs showed no dark
colors (no corals). Thus, assuming that the number of hosts is the estimator of fish species
richness, it is concluded that small patch reefs are worth much more than a single large
continuous reef in terms of reef fish habitat, if the total area is equivalent.

MICROBIAL PROCESSES IN THE SEDIMENT AT A SHALLOW-WATER HYDROTHERMAL VENT IN A TROPICAL CORAL REEF (Abstract ID: 28329)

CURBING SEDIMENATION OF CORAL REEFS THROUGH COMPREHENSIVE
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT; A CASE STUDY FROM FAGA’ALU, AMERICAN
SAMOA (Abstract ID: 29212)

Shallow-water hydrothermal vents occurring in tropical coral reefs are often used as analogs
reef organisms. Given the importance of microbial processes in nutrient cycling on the reef,
little is known about how these processes may differ in sediments subject to hydrothermal
venting. Here we studied a hydrothermal vent system in Papua New Guinea, combining
biogeochemical observations with metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing of
the microbial community in the sediment. Our results suggested changes in major element
cycles (carbon, nitrogen, sulfur) related to hydrothermal venting. We detected a shift in the
active photosynthetic community with a decrease in cyanobacterial and an increase in
diatom gene transcripts. Net photosynthesis seemed to be negatively affected at the vent,
presumably due to a trade-off between increased CO2 availability and increased trace
element stress. Furthermore, gene expression patterns suggested increased nitrification,
whereas nitrogen fixation and denitrification to ammonia might be reduced. The composition of the sulfate reducing community was altered at the vent, and sulfate reduction rates
and gene expression were severely diminished. We propose that hydrothermal activity in a
tropical coral reef may drastically alter nutrient cycling in the sediment, potentially resulting
in the degradation and simplification of such a diverse and complex system.

Although comprehensive stakeholder-engagement is recognized as essential for a
holistic and effective approach to conservation, efforts often fall short in one sector or
another. This presentation will share lessons learned from Faga’alu, American Samoa,
a small Pacific island tropical watershed, where a collaborative ethos continues to
push initiatives to curb sedimentation of coral reefs. Faga’alu’s coral reefs demonstrate
relatively high coral cover and serve as a critical habitat for a variety of marine species,
including threatened species and organisms with cultural significance as a supplemental
food source for subsistence fishing. In 2011, the community of Faga’alu developed a
Village-based Conservation Plan, identifying sedimentation as a priority threat to their
immediate environment. In response, a sediment budget study commenced, identifying
the local quarry as the primary contributor. Five years later, Faga’alu has developed
extensive private-public partnerships by leveraging federal assistance through its designation as a United States Coral Reef Task Force Watershed Partnership Initiative site and
pursuing incentive-based approaches with the local quarry to reduce the introduction of
sediments into the natural environment.


FOLDSCOPE: AN ORIGAMI-BASED SOLUTION TO SCALABLE FIELD MICROSCOPY (Abstract ID: 28315)

(Abstract ID: 28470)

Recent efforts in citizen science have shown that crowd-sourced wildlife observations
can substantially contribute to our understanding of local and regional biodiversity. However, direct observations by citizen-scientists are usually limited to relatively large, macroscopic organisms, often neglecting the much larger range of species richness found at
microscopic scales. This is because 1. microscopy is often viewed as an activity limited
to scientists, and 2. microscopes are often expensive, fragile, and difficult to carry into the
field. As a solution to these issues, we have developed the Foldscope: a rugged, ultra-low
cost (<$1 in materials), origami-based microscope that is assembled by folding a pre-cut
sheet of paper and can provide >400x magnification. Foldscopes can be operated
independently of electricity, or they can be coupled to smartphone cameras to capture
images and videos of live organisms while in the field. To date, we have manufactured
and distributed 50,000 Foldscope units to participants in 135 countries (see their findings
organisms in a diverse range of settings including the Amazon rainforest, a tiger reserve
(Kaziranga National Park) and major river (Brahmaputra River) in India, the Ngorongoro
Conservation Area in Tanzania, and marine environments along the Pacific coast. Our
aim is to provide a scalable tool such that any curious person in the world can explore
his or her local microcosmos and broadcast his or her findings to a global community.

Cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbioses underpin coral reef productivity. However, certain
aspects of this symbiosis, such as the partitioning of respiration between animal host
and algal symbiont, remain enigmatic. We quantified mitochondrial enzyme activity
as a proxy for aerobic respiratory capacity in the symbiotic sea anemone Exaiptasia
pallida. Host, symbiont, and combined host + symbiont (holobiont) mitochondrial citrate
synthase (CS) activity were strong predictors of holobiont respiration. There was a
positive association between symbiont density and host CS activity, and a negative correlation between host- and symbiont CS activities. We also found differences in symbiont
CS activity between anemones hosting different Symbiodinium species (ITS2-type A4
Symbiodinium or Symbiodinium minutum [ITS2-type B1]). Notably, partitioning of
differed from the respective host/symbiont biomass ratios. Moreover, the relationship
between the partitioning of total CS activity and the host/symbiont biomass ratio was
