ecosystems. Previous studies revealed the contrasting responses of reef building coral
species to human-led changes. Increased sea surface temperature (SST) reduced coral
annual extension in the Red Sea, whereas, terrestrial pollution increased extension in
Indonesia. These two concurrent threats raise some questions about coral annual extension in the Anthropocene. Coral reefs in Chuuk lagoon have suffered from high anthropogenic impacts through the WWII and subsequent population growth, additionally, the
SST increased by about 0.5 °C over the same period. To assess the relative importance
of these two factors in coral annual extension, we collected two coral cores of Porites sp.
at Newman and Nepukos which are located at Weno island in Chuuk lagoon, Federated
States of Micronesia. Age estimation based on band counts of x-radiograph indicated
the first core encompasses the time-period 1938-2013 and the second core is estimated
to include the entire 20th century. According to correlation analyses, coral annual extension showed no correlation with SST and population density, however, significantly correlated with precipitation on the most recent half of the record. While the second core
is still being analyzed, the preliminary results indicate increased human population and
concomitant deforestation caused an influx of terrestrial pollutants and subsequently
affect coral annual extension rather than global warming nearshore reef.

invertebrate overgrowth etc.) are expected to be an increasing threat to coral reefs in a
warming and acidifying ocean. Timor-Leste became a sovereign state in 2002 and is
located in the Lesser Sunda Islands in the southern Indo-Pacific. Line intercept transects
for benthic cover and 15 x 2 m belt transects quantifying coral health and disease were
conducted in November 2015 at two urban and two rural sites and revealed varying levels of coral cover and low levels of disease. Beloi Barrier Reef, a rural site, in the channel
25 km off the coast had the highest coral cover and diversity compared to the remaining
rural and urban sites onshore, but also had the highest level of coral disease at 1.6%;
however, the sites had higher levels of compromised health such as tunicate overgrowth
and flatworm infestation. Additional sediment and macroalgal samples were collected at
all sites for analysis of heavy metals and stable isotope analysis respectively to determine
any potential links with coral disease and compromised health.

edu

JEJU ISLAND, SOUTH KOREA SOFT CORAL COMMUNITY STRUCTURE ANALYSIS (Abstract ID: 29331 | Poster ID: 65)
Anthozoa recorded that inhabit total seven Order, 19 Family, 43 species in Munseom,
Beomseom, train rocks, Jeju-do, Korea to march and june in 2011. Munseom recorded
that 27 species and 30.8% mean coverage to high diversity and dominant rate in june.
Beomseom and train rocks almost similar leveled that each species number(23 and 22
species) and dominant rate(21.2%, 25.4%). Anaysis of similarity of anthozoa between
communities that Beomseom and train rocks had the highest similarity. Munseom and
Beomseom had the lowest similarity. But statistically three areas appeared a similar
community structure. This study compare with Seoul National University (2009) study of
survey results of research region(munseom, beomseom, trains rocks) that were almost
the same level species number, mean coverage, diversity index. Anthozoa dominant species composition showed a similar trend. and recently anthozoa community is expected
that stable populations are being maintained. Legal management species of this research
appeare in total seven species Myriopathes lata, Dendronephthya suensoni, Dendrophthya putteri Kukenthal, Euplexaura crassa, Dendronephthya castanea, Dendronephthya
mollis, Tubastraea coccinea.

FILLING THE GAPS: IMPUTATION OF CORAL TRAIT DATABASE AND FUNCTIONAL BIOGEOGRAPHY OF CORALS (Abstract ID: 28289)
Variability in functional traits and their responses to environmental filters provide raw
material for a variety of research areas from population and community ecology to
conservation. However, compilation of trait information on a global scale requires
prohibitively extensive fieldwork. Consequently, global trait databases for many organisms, including corals, remain largely sparse, and understanding the spatial distribution of
corals’ functional diversity is challenging. A common practice in other taxonomic groups
for missing values is to disregard the missing values and characterise functional groups
only using the known values despite the fact that such reduction in datasets may result
in erroneous or biased projections. Here we show that missing values in global trait databases can be imputed using statistical tools. Functional biogeography of corals based on

NOAA’S NATIONAL CORAL REEF MONITORING PROGRAM: INTEGRATED
INFORM CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 29448)
The National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration’s Coral Reef Conservation Program
(CRCP) strives to protect, conserve, and restore coral reef resources by maintaining
healthy ecosystem function. Since 2013, CRCP has supported the National Coral Reef
Monitoring Program (NCRMP) to collect biological, physical, and socioeconomic data

174

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

surprisingly high percentage of many fishes recruit to their natal reefs and recent studies
have indicated that connectivity may be so limited that genetic differences may persist at
small spatial scales (kilometres to tens of kilometres). Key elements of such differences
include larval dispersal and behaviour and post settlement longevity. We show that larval
behaviour that can assist in the persistence of genotypes while very short lives, for some
common fishes, could weaken genetic resilience.

goal of this effort is to collect the information needed to gauge the changing conditions
and management. NCRMP is a long-term approach to provide an ecosystem prospective via monitoring benthic, fish, climate, and socioeconomic variables in a consistent
and integrated manner, to provide information supporting NOAA and our State, Territorial, and other Federal partners efforts to more effectively manage and conserve our nation’s coral reefs. We will present on the development and implementation of the general
themes and core indicators of NCRMP, as well as the partnership with the University of
Maryland Center for Environmental Science, to develop pilot status and trends reports
(Report Cards) synthesizing the monitoring data on coral reef ecosystems, including
benthic, fish, climate, and socioeconomic data streams.


REPRODUCTIVE BIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN CORAL, PLATYGYRA SINENSIS AT
MU KO SAMAE SAN, CHON BURI PROVINCE IN THE UPPER GULF OF THAILAND (Abstract ID: 29709 | Poster ID: 167)


Platygyra sinensis is one of the most common species in Mu Ko Samae San, Chon
Buri Province, the upper Gulf of Thailand. In this study, gamete development and
post-fertilization development of the brain coral Platygyra sinensis, were investigated.
From the field observations, the results showed that the development of gametes started
from February to March of each year, and the spawning occurred later from March to
April within 4 to 5 days after the full moon. After the spawning, gametes were collected
and brought back to the coral hatchery for fertilization. Fertilization rates of the gametes
in the coral hatchery were more than 95%, and the settlement rates of planulae varied
from 15 to 30%. This finding can be a baseline data for further use of sexual propagation
of corals in Thailand.

PROTECTED AREAS NETWORK (PAN) – NATIONAL SYSTEM FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS IN PALAU (Abstract ID: 28772)
The Protected Area Network (PAN) is a national mechanism to protect the critical
biodiversity and ecosystems in Palau. The PAN was established in 2003 under the
national low for enhancing the state governments to conserve the national network of
protected areas. State governments may apply for membership to register their protected
areas as PAN sites through the PAN Office that handle all the activities regarding to
members for better management of the PAN sites. This national system also includes
Green Fees, a fee paid by all visitors leaving Palau. These fees go into a restricted PAN
Fund, which is used for management of PAN member sites. A five year Science and
Technology Research Partnership for Sustainable Development (SATREPS) project has
been conducted for the Sustainable Management of Coral Reef and Island Ecosystems:
Responding to the Threat of Climate Change since 2013 to provide scientific data and
information for conservation of Palau’s Island ecosystems focusing on climate changes,
biodiversity conservation and protected area management. The project has also supported capacity building for state governments on monitoring and management of the
PAN sites to enhance conservation of the biodiversity of entire islands ecosystems of
Palau. This presentation shows the processes and mechanisms of the project to support


TEMPORAL PATTERNS OF GENE EXPRESSION IN RESPONSE TO HEAT AND
SALINITY STRESS IN PLATYGYRA DAEDALEA FROM THE PERSIAN GULF
(Abstract ID: 29774)
Scleractinian corals are severely threatened by rising ocean temperatures and some
coral populations possess heritable genetic variation in thermal tolerance, providing
potential for adaptation to climate change. High seawater temperatures (reaching 36°C)
and salinity (up to 45 ppt) in the Persian/Arabian Gulf have likely selected for environmental stress tolerance in the local populations, presenting a unique resource for the
study of corals’ adaptive potential in a warming climate. To investigate thermal tolerance
phenotypes in these populations, we focused on aposymbiotic larval stages of Platygyra
daedalea. Thermal tolerance (survival during heat stress) was measured in 55 controlled
crosses generated from 13 parental colonies. We documented moderate genetic variation in thermal tolerance (h2=0.33), and identified families with contrasting tolerance
phenotypes. To investigate the functional basis for these differences, larvae were exposed
to factorial combinations of elevated temperature and salinity. Transcriptional responses
were examined using RNA-Seq, which revealed greater upregulation of putative stress
response genes in susceptible than resistant families. To investigate the dynamics of gene
expression more directly, we conducted 10 additional crosses in a subsequent season
and profiled changes in gene expression during a time-course thermal stress experiment.
This study provides insights into the mechanisms through which stress tolerant corals
persist in the Gulf, and ultimately into possible mechanisms through which corals may
adapt to climate change.


INVASIVE MARINE PREDATOR ALTERS COMPETITION BETWEEN NATIVE
CORAL-REEF FISHES (Abstract ID: 28866)
Our understanding about the mechanistic ability of invasive predators to influence native
communities and ecosystems is limited. We tested whether the invasive Pacific red lionfish (Pterois volitans) alters interspecific competition between native species on Atlantic
reefs: fairy and blackcap basslets (Gramma loreto and Gramma melacara). We conducted
a manipulative experiment in The Bahamas to measure the response of each prey
species in local populations under isolated reef ledges in both the presence and absence
of its competitor cross-factored with the presence and absence of the invasive predator.
Lionfish significantly affected the density of juvenile fairy basslet through time (p=0.012),
causing substantial declines in prey by the sixth week of manipulation. Lionfish indirectly
enhanced the feeding position and individual growth rate of juvenile blackcap basslet:
these fish exhibited shifts towards coveted feeding positions and higher growth rates
that were comparable to the response in populations where fairy basslet had been
experimentally removed. Additionally, the effects of competition on these parameters
were significant in low-lionfish reefs (position: p=0.043; growth: p=0.046), but were not
significant in high-lionfish reefs (position: p=0.201; growth: p=0.680). Lionfish did not
alter any effects of competition on fairy basslet. These results indicate that predation by
invasive lionfish differentially affects fairy basslet, which tips the balance of competition
from symmetrical to asymmetrical in favor of blackcap basslet.


PHYLOGENETIC RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN ZOANTHARIANEPIZOANTHUS
(EUNICIDAE) (Abstract ID: 28015 | Poster ID: 82)
Examples of co-speciation between hosts and their associates based on phylogenetic
molecular analyses have become common in recent years. However, there are few
marine invertebrate examples due to taxonomic uncertainty in many taxa hindering such
analyses. In this research, we investigated the phylogenetic relationships among three
species of epibiotic zoantharians (Epizoanthus spp.) and their host eunicid worms (Eunice
spp.). Freshly collected and museum Pacific Ocean specimens of Eunice spp. withEpizoanthus colonies on their zig-zag tubes were examined. Molecular and morphological
analyses were conducted to estimate phylogenetic congruence between the zoantharians and eunicid worms. The phylogenetic relationships were conducted using sequences
from multiple molecular markers (nuclear 18S ribosomal DNA and internal transcribed
spacer region of ribosomal DNA; mitochondrial 16S ribosomal DNA and cytochrome
oxidase subunit I) for both hosts and epibionts. Phylogenetic congruence was tested
by topology-based, distance-based, and data-based methods. The combined data set

de

LARVAL BEHAVIOR AND LONGEVITY OF FISHES INFLUENCES THE GENETIC
RESILIENCE OF REEF-BASED POPULATIONS (Abstract ID: 27863)
The persistence of reef fish populations depends on reproductive output, larval
behaviour and survival, pathways of connectivity and postsettlement processes. A

175

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

changed expression of genes linked to immune, cytoskeletal, oxidative stress and lipid
metabolism pathways. In addition, we used co-expression networks to isolate temperature and symbiosis transcriptional patterns. These findings expand our understanding
of how the physical environment, biotic pressures and molecular coral stress-response
mediate pre-settlement events in corals.

indicates co-speciation and duplication betweenEpizoanthus species and eunicid worms.
In this presentation, we discuss the phylogenetic relationships between Epizoanthus and
Eunice, showing the existence of previously unknown cryptic diversity.


SPECIES AND GENOTYPE DISTIBUTION OF POCILLOPORA DAMICORNIS-LIKE
CORAL ACROSS SUBTROPICAL TO TEMPERATE REGION IN JAPAN (Abstract ID:
29997 | Poster ID: 51)
Rising sea surface temperature is expected to have impacts on distribution of corals.
Therefore it is necessary to study the current distribution of species and genetic
were distinguished by genetic analysis based on the mitochondrial open reading frame
(ORF) sequences although morphological identification is difficult especially in field.
distribution of both species has been observed in other region of Indo-Pacific. We also
shared in the tropical Pacific reefs, and the other one is a novel one that is dominated in
the temperate region. We obtained similar result by genetic analysis using polymorphic
nuclear microsatellite markers that showed clear genetic break between subtropical and
temperate regions. Such limited gene flow among the regions implies the adaptation of
the populations to the peculiar environment in each region. Distribution of genotypes of

FROM REEF TO TABLE: SOCIAL AND ECOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING
CORAL REEF FISHERIES, ARTISANAL SEAFOOD SUPPLY CHAINS, AND SEAFOOD SECURITY (Abstract ID: 28249)
Ocean and coastal ecosystems provide critical fisheries, coastal protection, and cultural
benefits to communities worldwide, but these services are diminishing due to local and
global threats. In response, place-based strategies involve communities and resource
users in management have proliferated. Here, we present a transferable community-based
approach to assess the social and ecological factors affecting resource sustainability and
food security in a small-scale, coral reef fishery. Our results show that this small-scale fishery provides large-scale benefits to communities, including 7,353 ± 1547 kg yr-1 (mean ±
SE) of seafood per year, equating to >30,000 meals with an economic value of $78,432.
The vast majority of the catch is used for subsistence, contributing to community food
security: 58% is kept, 33.5% is given away, and 8.5% is sold. Our spatial analysis assesses
the geographic distribution of community beneficiaries from the fishery (the “food shed”
for the fishery), and we document that 20% of seafood procured from the fishery is used
for sociocultural events that are important for social cohesion. This approach provides a
method for assessing social, economic, and cultural values provided by small-scale food
systems, as well as important contributions to food security, with significant implications
for conservation and management. This interdisciplinary effort aims to demonstrate a
transferable participatory research approach useful for resource-dependent communities
as they cope with socioeconomic, cultural, and environmental change.


FAILURE TO SPAWN: A SELF-CRITIQUE OF PARTNERSHIP SUCCESSES AND
SINKHOLES (Abstract ID: 29537)
It’s easy to take a victory lap when effective partnerships lead to successful implementation; it’s less fun to admit when these efforts fail to ignite sustainable, long-term action.
Why does one watershed or marine conservation area get more traction than another?
What absentee partner is critical to sustaining implementation enthusiasm? Who is
maintaining those restoration projects? Where did that management plan go? After a
decade of providing technical assistance, training, and partnership support for addressing land-based sources of pollution in the US coral reef jurisdictions, we have had plenty
of time to reflect on the factors contributing to our successes and sinkholes. Through
live, interactive audience polling, this session will encourage you to critique your own
partnerships and projects and identify mechanisms for improving your chances of longterm success. Lessons-learned and laughter, not finger-pointing and criticism, will help to
remind us that there is always room for improvement, particularly when our goal of coral
conservation is so high.

IDENTIFICATION OF PRIORITIES FOR THE EXPANSION OF THE MARINE
PROTECTED AREA ESTATE OF REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES (INDIAN OCEAN)
(Abstract ID: 29514 | Poster ID: 527)


The Republic of Seychelles is responsible for a vast Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)
and 155 islands covering 1.35 million km2. The Government of Seychelles (GoS) has
declared a large number of protected areas (PAs). The existing marine PA estate only
the PA estate beyond the Aichi Targets set by the Convention on Biological Diversity Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020. The goal set by GoS was 50% of all terrestrial
areas, and 30% of the Seychelles EEZ, 15% of which would be identified as ‘no-take’ areas. The GoS recognised the need to assess the existing estate and the potential benefit
of using spatial decision-support tools to identify priority gaps for the future expansion
of the national network. With the support of a GoS-UNDP-GEF project, the Seychelles
Systematic Conservation Planning (SEY-SCP) process was launched. The SEY-SCP
process established new procedures to promote the sharing of data, which facilitated the
release and compilation of previously unavailable datasets from national, regional and
international sources. Through a series of workshops and MARXAN modelling of these
datasets, a provisional set of PAs was delineated for further consultation. These included
larger areas proposed as “Sustainable Use” areas, which are closely compatible with the
existing “Fisheries Exclusion Zones” that subdivide national and international fishing
grounds. The key steps in the SEY-SCP process will be presented with the main results
and recommended follow-up actions.

HYPERTHERMAL STRESS ALTERS TRANSCRIPTOMIC RESPONSE OF CORAL
LARVAE AT THE ONSET OF SYMBIOSIS (Abstract ID: 29494)
Cnidarian-dinoflagellate partnerships collapse under prolonged thermal stress associated
with climate change. We are beginning to understand the physiological and molecular
consequences of bleaching events on host-symbiont associations in adult corals; however, few studies have addressed the effects of thermal stress during onset of symbiosis
in coral larvae. The capacity of larvae to buffer climate-induced stress while undergoing
symbiosis comes with physiological trade-offs altering behavior, development, settlement and survivorship. Understanding the mechanisms that underlie the formation of
symbiosis during early developmental stages is critical to predicting coral resilience and
resistance to stress and overall reef ecosystem health in the future. Here we examined
the effects of both thermal stress and onset of symbiosis together on symbiont colonization, survival, and host global gene expression in Acropora digitifera larvae. The combined
stress increased mortality, decreased symbiont colonization by half and algal density
by 98.5% after two weeks. Using RNASeq, we identified 232 differentially expressed
genes with the interaction of olonization and thermal stress. The combination of events

176

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

com

many reefs receive larvae from reefs that are significantly warmer or cooler than the
local temperature. This has important implications for conservation planning, because
connectivity may allow some reefs to have an inherited heat tolerance that is higher or
lower than would be predicted based on local conditions alone.

LONG TERM CHANGES IN THE STATUS OF THE CORAL REEF OF ALDABRA
ATOLL (SEYCHELLES): A GLOBALLY SIGNIFICANT CORAL REEF OBSERVATORY (Abstract ID: 29804)


Aldabra, the world’s second largest atoll, situated away from the main populated
Seychelles islands, provides an ideal benchmark for assessing long-term changes in
coral reef health. This remote atoll only narrowly avoided becoming a military base in
the 1960’s due to an intervention by the Royal Society and David Stoddart. Managed
by the Seychelles Islands Foundation (SIF) since independence, the atoll was inscribed
as a UNESCO World Heritage (WH) site in 1982 and is still one of only two marine
WH sites in the entire Indian Ocean. Marine research has been limited compared to
terrestrial studies due to operational challenges. After the mass coral bleaching event
in 1997/1998, an external group of researchers established the Aldabra Monitoring
Programme (AMP) to help SIF assess the condition of the reefs. The AMP completed
surveys in 1999, 2001- 2006 and 2008. In 2012, SIF recognised the need to build internal
capacity for marine monitoring. With support from a GOS-UNDP-GEF funded project,
the protocol was revised to create a more practical scalable solution: existing sites at
10m and 20m depth were resurveyed and repositioned to 15m and 5m and new video
and photographic survey technologies were introduced for benthos and fish. The results
of the new programme demonstrate the recovery of the reef since 1998, but also
highlight new concerns, including the presence of Terpios hoshinota, the furthest western
reported occurrence of this coral-killing sponge in the Indian Ocean, which together with
the anticipated coral bleaching in 2016 pose a threat to this legacy site.

INTEGRATING CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY, RECIPROCAL TRANSPLANTS AND
REEF BIOGEOCHEMISTRY TO DECIPHER THE MECHANISMS FOR CORAL


There is growing concern about the future of coral reefs and the impact of anthropogenic stressors including eutrophication, ocean acidification, and warming. However, the
lack of knowledge of fundamental coral cellular mechanisms precludes our ability to understand and predict general and species-specific responses to stress. Conversely, results
from controlled laboratory experiments are not necessarily relevant for corals in the field,
where environmental conditions may change dramatically from one reef site to the next,
limiting our ability to implement appropriate management decisions. Using an integrated
set of field studies, including sampling of corals from different environments and reciprocal transplants between sites and depths, with manipulative single stressor aquarium
studies, immunohistochemistry, and ecosystem level biogeochemical studies, we are trying to better understand mechanisms underlying coral calcification and photosynthesis.
We will present results from studies in Bocas del Toro, Panama, with support from the
to calcification and photosynthesis in three coral species, Orbicella franksi (Robusta),
Acropora cervicornis (Complexa), and Porites furcata (Complexa) at two field sites with
different environmental conditions, as well as in aquarium studies. The goal is to assess
the relevance of these cellular mechanisms in nature and to identify biomarkers of coral
physiology that can eventually be used to monitor and predict responses to stress.

THE TIMELINE OF THERMAL ACCLIMATIZATION IN AMERICAN SAMOAN
CORALS: HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE TO GAIN BLEACHING RESISTANCE?
(Abstract ID: 28559)


Corals native to variable thermal environments often resist bleaching temperatures
and survive exposures that typically bleach conspecifics from cooler environments;
providing promising evidence for the persistence of reefs under projected global climate
change. This bleaching resistance is attributed to acclamatory or adaptive conditioning to brief, but frequent high water temperatures. Acclimatization plays an important
role in modifying thermal thresholds and has been observed within 1 week and up to
2 years. However, it is not known what acclimatory potential happens during the first
year and how many species are capable of acclimation gains in bleaching resistance.
This study transplanted populations of Porites lobata and Goniastrea retiformis from
three contrasting backreef environments in Ofu Island, American Samoa into a highly
variable pool known to elicit increased bleaching tolerance. Following one week and six
months, transplanted and native coral nubbins were subjected to a controlled thermal
exposure. Physiological responses to bleaching – zooxanthellae density, chlorophyll
a, and photosynthetic efficiency – were quantified to elucidate the level of bleaching
resistance attributed to acclimatization. One week of conditioning was not enough time
to elicit enhanced bleaching resistance for these species, in contrast to previous studies
using Acropora. Comparative results following 6 months of exposure are being collected
and will be presented. This study provides a significant expansion of previous work and
critical insight into coral acclimatization dynamics.

ENVIRONMENTAL METABOLOMICS – A NEW DIAGNOSTIC TOOL FOR CORAL
REEF ECOSYSTEM ASSESSMENT AND MONITORING? (Abstract ID: 30070)
Worldwide, coral reefs are under increasing pressure from a variety of environmental
and anthropogenic stresses, creating a need to establish efficient and accurate methods
to monitor reef health. Metabolomics, the comprehensive measurement of all metabolites and low-molecular-weight molecules in an organism, provides an opportunity to
assess the effects of environmental change at an extremely fine scale. This should lead
to the identification of suitable bio-indicators for use in coral reef ecosystem monitoring.
Currently, we are in a developmental phase, where technologies are being refined, and
baseline knowledge on a variety of metabolomes is being acquired. We characterized
metabolic profiles of Stylopohora pistillata, collected from three geographically disjoined
locations in the GBR that differ in water quality. Tissue was analyzed by preparing
acetone/methanol extracts for Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry. A Random
Forest analysis indicated significant differentiation of metabolic profiles in relation to
sampling location, and also identified diagnostic metabolites. Differences among regions
were quantified via a hierarchical Bayesian model. This talk will summarize the results of
this study, we critically evaluate the potential of environmental metabolomics as a new
monitoring technology for assessing the health of coral reefs. In particular, we highlight
issues concerning sample collection, metabolite identification, and statistical analyses.



POTENTIAL ROLE OF LARVAL CONNECTIVITY IN CORAL TEMPERATURE
THRESHOLDS (Abstract ID: 28407)

HOMOLOGS TO HUMAN CANCER GENES ASSOCIATED WITH CORAL
GROWTH ANOMALIES (Abstract ID: 28448)

The sensitivity of corals to elevated temperature depends on their acclimation and
adaptation to the local maximum temperature regime. Through larval dispersal, however, coral populations can receive larvae from regions that are significantly warmer or
colder. If these exogenous larvae carry genetic- based tolerances to colder or warmer
temperatures, then the thermal sensitivity of the receiving population may be lower or
higher, respectively. Using a high-resolution Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS)
configuration for the Coral Triangle region, we quantify the potential role of connectivity
in determining the thermal stress threshold (TST) of a typical broadcast spawner. The
model results suggest that even with a pelagic larval dispersal period of only 10 days,

Scleractinian disease outbreaks can be hugely detrimental to coral reef ecosystems and
are only predicted to increase in frequency and severity under long-term global climate
change. Despite great advances in our knowledge of coral diseases since their discovery
over 50 years ago, disease causation is still unknown or poorly understood for many
diseases due to their complex multifactorial etiologies. It is also clear that not all individuals from the same species are afflicted when there is a disease outbreak, suggesting
that both environmental and biological factors will determine the long-term outcome of
a population. For the first time, next-generation technologies such as restriction site177

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

of SR for different types of coral morphologies or size classes is still lacking. This study
provides a value of SR for six common morphologies of scleractinian corals (branching,
corymbose, foliose, massive, tabulate, and staghorn) across two different size classes.
We used novel photogrammetric techniques, which enabled the precise reconstruction
and measurement of 3D computer models of 108 coral specimens from photographs
corals, however SR did not differ significantly between these three morphs. The lowest
values of SR were attributed to massive and tabulate morphs. Additionally, significant
differences between size classes were found only for branching, foliose, and tabulate
morphologies. Close-range photogrammetry provided a useful non-invasive technique to
calculate SR at a high resolution. If incorporated in monitoring programs, this SR index
will aid in quantifying the change in habitat complexity in a reef as a result of the shifts in
community composition caused by disturbances.

associated DNA sequencing (RAD-seq) provide the tools to examine the genome from
non-model organisms, like scleractinian corals, relatively easily and cheaply. Here we use
ezRAD and Seanome (a pipeline developed to analyze ezRAD data) to screen the single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between both healthy and diseased (growth anomalies) Acropora cytherea colonies from Palmyra Atoll, Central Pacific. We found consistent
genetic differences between colonies with and without growth anomalies. In addition,
gene ontology (GO) annotation of the enriched variants in the diseased colonies highlighted a number of regions that were linked to important functional components found
in human cancers. This is the first instance genetically linking hyperplasias in humans
to the more basal cnidarians, indicating that this process is potentially conserved and
fundamental in metazoans.


PIGGYBACK-THE-WINNER: ECOSYSTEM AND EVOLUTIONARY EFFECTS OF
VIRAL LYTIC TO LYSOGENIC SWITCHES ON CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28882)

CARBONIC ANHYDRASE ACTIVITY IN THE SYMBIOTIC SEA ANEMONEANTHOPLEURA ELEGANTISSIMA ACROSS A LATITUDINAL GRADIENT (Abstract ID:
29551)

Viruses and protists can control microbial communities through density-dependent
predation. This top-down dynamic inhibits microbial growth, at odds with increasing
microbial densities observed on degraded coral reefs. Viral and microbial abundances on
coral reefs show a decline in the ratio of viruses to hosts, consistent with suppressed viral
predation at high host density. Bioinformatic analysis of viral communities explained this
deviation from density-dependence, showing that high host densities are associated with
lysogenic dynamics - where viruses integrate into host genomes - rather than lytic predation. Lysogenic viral communities carry increased levels of pathogenicity genes, possibly
granting their hosts the ability to evade protist predators. Viruses therefore appear to
become parasitic when predation is favored by density- and frequency-dependent Killthe-Winner dynamics, a model we term Piggyback-the-Winner (PtW). PtW dynamics
likely facilitate increasing microbial densities as non-lytic activity is favoured at high host
density and by conferring on hosts broad-spectrum immunity to viral infection as well as
viral-encoded functions. The resulting lineages with integrated viruses are ecologically
and evolutionary divergent from their non-lysogen conspecifics and experience different
selection pressures. This may explain how degraded ecosystems that have transitioned
towards PtW rather than more resilient Kill-the-Winner dynamics are dominated by few,
unstable, pathogenic bacterial lineages that can survive at high densities with protective
integrated viruses.

The sea anemone Anthopleura elegantissima occurs in the intertidal zone from Mexico
to Alaska. It is symbiotic with two genera of microalgae, the highly productive dinoflagellate Symbiodinium and the less productive chlorophyte Elliptochloris. The enzyme
carbonic anhydrase (CA) catalyzes the interconversion of bicarbonate and CO2 and is
known to play an important role in delivering CO2 to symbionts embedded deep in host
tissues. Symbiont types in anemones are differentially distributed depending on latitude,
tidal height, and light level. Anemones containing Symbiodinium are found at lower
latitude, higher light environments compared to Elliptochloris-containing anemones
that occur at higher latitude and lower light. Anemones in very low light lack symbionts.
Previous research found aposymbiotic and Elliptochloris-containing anemones to have
similar and low CA activity compared to Symbiodinium-containing anemones. We predicted that anemones collected from lower latitudes would have greater CA activity than
anemones of the same symbiotic state at higher latitudes. To test the effect of light on
were collected from several locations ranging from central Oregon to the Puget Sound.
Symbiont density counts and CA assays were performed in triplicate on each anemone.



CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEM PROPAGULE RETENTION AND EXPORT UNDER
SCENARIOS OF CLIMATE CHANGE (2006-2100) (Abstract ID: 30060)

BRIDGING THE DIVIDE BETWEEN SYSTEMATIC CONSERVATION PLANNING
AND COMMUNITY-BASED CONSERVATION: A PHILIPPINES CASE STUDY
(Abstract ID: 30119 | Poster ID: 645)

Propagule transport within and between a global circumtropical array of coral reef
habitats (derived from the WRI Reefs at Risk Revisited global database) was investigated
using flow-fields from CMIP5 Earth System Models ESM2G RCP4.5 and RCP8.5
developed by the USA NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory coupled with
Lagrangian particle transport modeling. These models allowed long-term projection of
planktonic egg and larval connectivity out to year 2100 using ocean currents realized
under plausible scenarios of climate change. Temporal and spatial patterns of propagule
connectivity were identified using generalized additive modeling (GAM). Connectivity
probabilities gradually increases over time. The increase in settlement success was
primarily due to increased retention of natal propagules. Mechanistically this appears to
be due to a general waning of current velocities over this temporal domain. Sensitivity of
results to spawning seasonality and pelagic larval duration were also investigated.

Systematic conservation planning is playing an increasingly important role in developing
marine protected area (MPA) networks that accommodate conflicting needs between conservation and fisheries. Yet, conservation planning continues to fail to inform conservation
action in the Coral Triangle, a region of high ecological importance. Failure to implement
conservation plans in this region has primarily resulted from inadequate consideration
of governance and socioeconomic factors. More specifically, there is a need to develop
and evaluate methodologies to accommodate small-scale MPA governance systems and
resource access needs of local stakeholders. This case study focuses on Sogod Bay in the
Philippines to examine the conservation and fisheries trade-offs of explicitly incorporating
marine tenure boundaries and spatial use patterns of small-scale fishers in conservation
planning within the context of the Coral Triangle Initiative. The decision-support tool,
Marxan with Zones, was applied to develop and evaluate three planning scenarios with
increasing levels of complexity, where additional zones and fisheries information were
added. Remote sensing data was used to identify priority areas for conservation, while
participatory mapping exercises with fishers were conducted in over 100 communities to
document the spatial resource patterns and minimize conservation costs. The results of this
research illustrates the importance of developing conservation planning approaches within
the broader governance and social context of the Coral Triangle.


USING PHOTOGRAMMETRY TO QUANTIFY THE CONTRIBUTION OF SIX


Coral reef biodiversity is at risk of declining. The relationship between biodiversity
and habitat structural complexity (through surface rugosity - SR) is key to understand, measure, and monitor this decline. Reef-building scleractinian corals enhance
biodiversity by increasing the number of three-dimensional structures, influencing key
ecological processes such as predation and foraging. However, a comprehensive value

EFFECTS OF ALGAL OVERGROWTH ON WATER FLOW INTO AND OUT OF
CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28905)
Many coral reefs are being overgrown by algae. We studied how algae of different
structure (branching vs. mat-forming) affected the flow of water into and out of the

178

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

fisheries in the USVI, largely due to assumptions regarding the relative importance of
the recreational fishery and the paucity of data. While recreational fishers fish from the
shore as well as boats, data indicate that boat based recreational fishing predominates.
This study, conducted in 2014, characterized boat-based recreational fisheries, compared
phone and mail survey methods, and determined if the annual vessel registration list
maintained by the USVI, Division of Environmental Enforcement, could be used as a
frame to survey recreational fishers. Of the 769 boat owners who were randomly selected from the 2013 boat registration list, 378 responded to the surveys. Of these, 38%
recreationally fished. More boaters responded to phone surveys (60%) than mail surveys
(40%). They fished primarily from their own power boats (81%) with a much smaller
percentage fishing from sailboats (16%). Seventy-five percent fished for food and 42%
considered themselves subsistence fishers. The primary families of fish targeted were the
Scombridae (54%), Lutjanidae (49%), Coryphaenidae (37%), and Serranidae (32%). The
most common recreational fishing technique was trolling. Fishers took an average of 3.3
trips per month with an average length of 4.4 hrs. The USVI vessel registration database
is an important tool for surveying recreational fishermen, but it can only be used effectively if the information is updated annually.

spaces within Hawaiian reefs dominated by branching coral, Porites compressa. Such flow
carries nutrients, oxygen, and prey to the organisms living in the reef, carries away wastes,
and transports released larvae from and settling larvae into reefs. Transects across reefs
since 2003 showed dominance in different years by living coral, mat-forming bubble
algae, or branching algae on dead coral. Measurements of vertical water velocities into
and out of reefs revealed that there was net flow into reefs in concave areas and net flow
up out of reefs at convex areas when coral or branching algae dominated, but that flow
was stopped when the cover of bubble algae was >60%. Field releases of larval mimics
showed that fewer mimics contacted surfaces within reefs (where hydrodynamic forces on
larvae are low enough that they can recruit) when there was algal cover, and that bubble
algae stops more mimics than branching algae. Thus, algae not only compete with coral,
but also can interfere with the recruitment of larvae and the transport of materials to and
from the organisms living in the reef.

MOLECULAR PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS OF THE SOFT CORAL FAMILY XENIIDAE (OCTOCORALLIA, ALCYONACEA) IN JAPAN AND TAIWAN (Abstract ID:
28322 | Poster ID: 75)


USING REGRESSION-BASED EFFECT SIZE META-ANALYSIS TO INVESTIGATE
CORAL RESPONSES TO CLIMATE CHANGE (Abstract ID: 28422)

Species in the family Xeniidae are classified by only a small number of morphological
characters. Therefore, species identification is quite difficult in this family and the species
diversity is still unknown in Asia. Around Oshima Island in Miyazaki, Japan, and Lyudao
Island in Taiwan, many soft corals including the Xeniidae inhabit. This study aims to know
the species richness and diversity of the Xeniidae there, using molecular phylogenetic
analysis. In this study, we collected xeniids including 248 specimens from Oshima isl. and
Lyudao Isl. Based on the taxonomic references, we identified 22 species from seven genera (Anthelia, Cespitularia, Efflatounaria, Heteroxenia, Sansibia, Sympodium, and Xenia) in the
Xeniidae. Fourteen out of 22 species were first records in Asia. In addition, we found total
four undescribed species in both islands. We analyzed these samples phylogenetically
using a mitochondrial marker (ND2) and a nuclear marker (ITS), together with additional
samples of other families which were collected in Oshima isl. Our results revealed that
all the seven genera exceptXenia were monophyletic, indicating that traditional taxonomy
based on the morphology reflects the molecular phylogenetic relationships among genera
in the Xeniidae. On the other hand, Xenia was paraphyletic. More detailed morphological
analysis of Xenia would be needed. In total, this study revealed high species diversity of
the Xeniidae in Japan and Taiwan, which is comparable to that of the Great Barrier Reefs.

Attempts to quantify the effects of ocean acidification and warming (OAW) on scleractinian corals provide a growing body of response measurements. However, placing empirical results into an ecological context is difficult, owing to large variations that reflect
both natural heterogeneity and scientific bias. This study addresses the heterogeneity
of climate change induced changes in coral recruitment and calcification. To discern
scientific bias and identify drivers of the remaining heterogeneity, 100 publications were
analyzed using a combination of weighted mixed effects meta-regression and factorial
effect size meta analysis. A linear model was applied to quantify the variation caused
by differing stress levels across studies. The least squares predictions were then used
to standardize individual study outcomes and weighted effect size meta-analysis was
performed on original and standardized outcomes separately. Increased temperature
significantly reduced larval survival, while ocean acidification hampered settlement and
calcification. Differences were based on biological traits (genera and life cycle stage),
environmental factors (climate and various characteristics of the collection site) and
experimental design (presence of particulate food, filter size and experimental duration).
Standardizing outcomes to linear model predictions proved useful in discerning strong
sources of scientific bias. This approach can inform policy and management on changes



THE BUTTERFLYFISHES (CHAETODONTIDAE) CONDITIONS IN RATATOTOK
PENINSULA REEF, NORTH SULAWESI PROVINCE, INDONESIA (A MONITORING
STUDY: 1996-2012) (Abstract ID: 28051 | Poster ID: 667)
Coral reef can be easily found along the coastline of the Ratatotok Peninsula which
integrated in South-East Minahasa, North Sulawesi, Indonesia. For years this area was
intensively used by villagers as fishing ground. In this area, a gold mining company
PTNMR was operated in 1996 – 2004 and put it’s tailing in the seabed of Buyat Bay.
Since 1996 to 2012, an intensive monitoring establish by PT Newmont Minahasa Raya
(PTNMR) to monitor closely the condition of butterfly fishes in the coastal areas of
Ratatotok and Buyat bay, South-East Minahasa region, North Sulawesi, Indonesia. The
objective of this study was to describe the butterfly fishes condition before, during, and
after PTNMR operation. Butterfly fish can be use as an indicator of the health of coral
reef. A Fish Visual Census method was applied for gathering butterfly fish data a long
50 m permanent transect established in four locations at the depth of 3 m and 10 m.
All data were collected each year. There were several changes occurred during the
monitoring period both on the number of genera and species of butterfly fishes on each
study sites. The presences of butterfly fish were varied during the whole monitoring
years. There are several factor were identified during this study that could be connected
to the fluctuation of butterfly fish conditions. Unsustainable fishing practices (bomb fishing, cyaniding, anchoring, bottom gillnet), Crown of Thorn Starfish attacked, and coral
disease weremajor factors that caused the changes in butterfly fish numbers. Keywords:
butterfly fish, chaetodontidae, coral reef, ratatotok

ECOLOGICAL DYNAMICS OF REEF CORALS ACROSS THE MIDDLE PLEISTOCENE CLIMATE TRANSITION (Abstract ID: 28287)
The Middle – Late Pleistocene (~1.2 – 0.125 Ma) climate is characterized by the
intensification of cyclic oscillations between glacial (cool, low sea level) and interglacial
(warm, high sea level) intervals. The fossil record, preserving a long-term dataset of coral
reef communities composed of extant species, reveals that reef corals have persisted
throughout the Pleistocene despite these frequent and dramatic climate fluctuations,
some of which are similar in magnitude to projected modern climate change. Although
it provides a valuable ecologic resource, the Middle to Late Pleistocene history of coral
reef ecology remains largely unexplored, particularly in relation to climate changes during this critical period of reef expansion, and persistence, into modern reef ecosystems.
Using deep drill core records through modern and historical reef environments, our
work integrates taxonomic and trait-based paleontological data with paleoclimate and
sedimentological interpretations as well as extant reef ecology to quantitatively evaluate
the temporal distribution of coral taxa and functional traits in relation to past climate and
environmental transitions. The overarching goal is to highlight the effects of past global
climate and environmental change on reef community taxonomic and trait composition
during the Middle to Late Pleistocene, when modern reef systems developed. These


ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29518)
Recreational fishing is important to the residents and economy of the United States
Virgin Islands (USVI). Government management efforts primarily focus on commercial

179

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

system), diffuse follow-on reaction products (including hypochlorous acid, hypochlorite,
hypobromous acid and hypobromite ion) may benefit macrobiota via inactivation of
microbial pathogens and competitors, or by other improvements to water quality, as long
as concentrations are too low to harm larger, ecotoxilogically less vulnerable organisms.

findings enhance our understanding of the range in response of coral community structure and functional traits to rapid climate change and biogeographic variability.


THE IMPORTANCE OF SOCIO-ECONOMIC INFORMATION FOR EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT OF PROTECTED AREAS IN SIX STATES IN PALAU (Abstract ID: 28574)

PHYSICAL PROCESSES CONTROLLING CONNECTIVITY AMONG SOUTH
FLORIDA CORAL REEFS AND PATHWAYS OF UPSTREAM RIVER INFLUENCE
(Abstract ID: 29587)

Often, studies on the effectiveness and sustainability of protected areas focus heavily
on biological and ecological information. While it is important to ascertain the progress
of these protected areas according to such indicators, equally important is assessing
progress towards socio-economic factors. Socio-economic information can provide
resource managers essential information regarding perceived socio-economic trends and
changes as they relate to these conservation areas. Globally, little information is known
regarding the socio-economic impacts of conservation areas as well as the role of such
areas in achieving human well-being outcomes. This study draws on a socio-economic
study of communities living nearby to conservation areas in six States across Palau.
Using a household questionnaire, a variety of socio-economic information was collected
on: socio-demographics, livelihood activities and income, food and water security, and
views of and support levels for the conservation areas. Overall, a number of indicators
were also developed to assess the role of these conservation areas in improving livelihood outcomes in these States in Palau. Preliminary results of this study suggest that
continuous socio-economic monitoring, educational outreach along with stricter law
enforcement is necessary to ensure the success of these conservation areas in achieving
human well-being management objectives. This study builds on a limited knowledge
base of empirical socio-economic data the findings of which can be relevant to other
small island developing states and elsewhere.

A combination of in situ and satellite measurements and high resolution modeling are
combined to study the connectivity among South Florida coral reef systems and the
influence of upstream nutrient sources on local water properties. The study area covers
the mesophotic Pulley Ridge reef on the Southwest Florida Shelf and the Florida Keys
shallow reef system, extending to the Dry Tortugas. An unprecedented 3-year time series
of currents and temperature reveals dominant circulation modes and pathways that are
influenced by both shelf dynamics and the proximity of the large scale Loop Current
(LC) - Florida Current (FC) system. Modulations of the LC/FC system, changes in LC
core (from extended to retracted position in the Gulf of Mexico) and eddy passages were
key factors in the connectivity pathways. Moreover, two major episodes of Mississippi
water offshore removal took place during the study period, with in situ data quantifying
their low-salinity signal around Pulley Ridge and the Florida Keys. Such episodes directly
influence water quality around coral reefs in the Northern Gulf of Mexico, but also have
remote impacts. For the first time, thick lenses of low salinity and high in nutrient content
waters of Mississippi River origin were traced hundreds of kilometers away from the
Mississippi Delta to the South Florida reefs, under both flooding and below normal Mississippi discharge conditions. A targeted numerical study elucidated the related processes
and revealed complex pathways connecting remote reef systems in the Gulf of Mexico.



EFFECTS OF SEDIMENTATION ON REEF-BUILDING SCLERACTINIAN CORALS
IN SOUTHEAST FLORIDA (Abstract ID: 28920 | Poster ID: 436)
Southeast Florida coral reefs can be characterized as marginal coral reefs. Close proximity to overdeveloped land causes significant biological effects on nearshore coral reefs
and coral-containing hardbottom communities. Sedimentation is arguably the most
significant adverse impact on coral communities; and although natural events such as
major storms can lead to sedimentation impacts, monitoring data from coastal projects
in southeast Florida indicate that sedimentation is much higher when enhanced by
anthropogenic activities. Large amounts of sediments are introduced to coastal water
in southeast Florida annually from fixed inlets, dredging, and nourishment. Amounts of
material and validity of data are discussed. Anthropogenically introduced sediments
also bring a considerable amount of nutrients to nearshore reefs and hardbottom communities. Sediments of different granulometric content have varying effects on coral
reef biota. Sedimentation of fine material has more extended and inhibitive effects on
corals than coarser sand, and the effect on benthic communities expressed in smothering, mortality, and partial mortality is also higher. Mechanisms and consequences of
such sedimentation are discussed. Measuring effects of turbidity and sedimentation is
a challenging task in coral reefs and nearshore hardbottom habitats. The currently used
nephelometric measurements of turbidity in Florida and sediment traps for sedimentation do not correlate with sediment deposition on reef biota. Methods of monitoring and
evaluations of impact are discussed.

A DECADE OF CORAL REEF BENTHIC COMMUNITY DYNAMICS FROM HIGH
SPATIAL RESOLUTION SATELLITE IMAGERY AND FIELD SURVEY DATA (Abstract ID: 29054)
To develop, implement and evaluate management strategies coral reef scientists and
managers require information to understand reefs and how they are changing. Maps
showing the distribution of corals, algae, sand, rubble and rock are an essential component of this information. While annual point and plot based benthic community data
have been collected over decades in long term ecological studies in marine environments, there has been limited work focussed on the creation and analysis of time series
benthic community maps of coral reefs. This study presents a set of benthic community
maps created from georeferenced field data in combination with high spatial resolution
(< 2 m pixels) satellite imagery. Imagery and field data were collected annually over a 14
year period (2002-2015) for Heron Reef, Great Barrier Reef, Australia. A semi-automated
object based classification was applied to pre-processed satellite imagery. Two thirds
of the benthic field data was used as calibration data for the classification, while the
remainder was used to validate the output maps. This method generated benthic community maps for each of the 14 years with overall accuracies ranging between 50-75%.
Our output time series of coral reef benthic community maps provides the necessary
information for assessment and understanding of the spatial and temporal dynamics of
the reef environment at Heron reef. The methods developed provide the basis for building on existing field surveys at other locations to deliver long term benthic community
maps for additional coastal and coral reef environments.


ELECTROLYSIS, HALOGEN OXIDIZING AGENTS AND REEF RESTORATION
(Abstract ID: 28902 | Poster ID: 469)


Applications for electrolysis of seawater include preventing fouling in piping systems and
conditioning water for aquaculture. Electrolysis creates a variety of chlorine-produced
oxidants that attack essential proteins of living tissues and react with organic materials,
reefs and enhancing growth and survival of corals. It is believed to act by elevating pH
and alkalinity at the cathode and/or by reducing enzymatic costs for pumping cations and
anions across cell membranes by providing an appropriate electrical gradient (Goreau,
2013). We hypothesize that a third mechanism for enhancing organisms may also be involved: inhibition of microorganisms by halogen oxidizing agents. Applying Faraday’s laws
of electrolysis for a system at 8.0 amperes and 90% efficiency gives an estimated ~230

A RE-EVALUATION OF NET COMMUNITY CALCIFICATION SENSITIVITY TO
CARBONATE SATURATION STATE (Abstract ID: 28383)
Ocean acidification-induced declines in carbonate mineral saturation are concerning for
coral reefs due to their presumed effects on coral reef community calcification. To improve forecasts of coral reef trajectories in an acidifying ocean, an increasing number of
studies aim to elucidate the sensitivity of coral reef community calcification to carbonate saturation states. Many of these studies employ a simple linear regression approach.
However, recent studies have highlighted the complications of interpreting these simple
linear regressions, including the dependence of saturation state on calcification, the abil-

180

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

ity of many corals to up-regulate their internal calcification environments, and calcification rate dependence on photosynthesis leading to collinearity with other environmental
variables. Here we re-evaluate a globally distributed set of published coral reef studies
using statistical approaches capable of handling multiple environmental predictors (light,
temperature, saturation state) to better quantify net community calcification sensitivity to carbonate mineral saturation state. This approach better constrains the range of
community-scale calcification sensitivities to carbonate mineral saturation state and
improves our ability to forecast OA effects on coral reef communities.

QUANTIFICATION OF CORAL BLEACHING AND CATASTROPHIC MORTALITY
OF REEF-BUILDING CORALS ALONG WEST HAWAI‘I ISLAND (Abstract ID: 29019)
In 2015, leeward reefs of Hawai’i Island suffered catastrophic coral mortality due to
widespread and severe coral bleaching, resulting in more than 90% mortality for massive
coral species, Porites evermanni, and 70% mortality for locally ubiquitous coral species,
Pocillopora meandrina. The prevalence of coral bleaching and related health conditions
North Kohala. Benthic cover was compared from 2003 through 2016 for 24 permanent
monitoring sites using standardized image analyses. Video transects during and after the
bleaching event and citizen science reports from the local Eyes of the Reef Network
provided supporting qualitative information. Survey results indicated unprecedented levels of coral bleaching for the majority of common coral species, resulting in a significant
decline in total coral cover. Results from these surveys were used to inform state managers working to identify and apply effective management actions for reef recovery.


A FUNCTIONAL MODEL OF BLACK BAND DISEASE BASED ON TRANSCRIPTOMICS (Abstract ID: 28353)
Black Band Disease is a persistent, pan geographic, coral disease. Despite its prevalence,
the activities of the mat microbiota in the disease process remain unknown. We used
metatranscriptomics to unravel the roles of the major mat constituents in the disease
process in the coral Favia sp. from the Red Sea. We enriched and sequenced mRNA
of the microbial consortium of the mat in BBD affected corals and compared with
healthy tissues and healthy colonies. Identification of metabolically active bacteria of
the disease front provides us with a glance at the microbial structure and function of
the various constituents. Results showed a shift in bacterial composition and function
in BBD affected colonies as compared with unaffected colonies. In the mat, members
of Cyanobacteria, Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes bacterial phyla are numerous and are
metabolically active. These groups are absent in healthy colonies of the same species.
The Adenosylhomocysteinase enzyme produced by cyanobacteria and involved in
cyanotoxin production, is the most transcribed gene in the band consortium. Members
of the Bacilli class found in the mat transcribed high levels of Rhodanase, an enzyme
responsible for cyanide detoxification. Vibrios are abundant in several pathogenic and
non-pathogenic forms, and are highly active, most of them transcribing the thiamine
ABC transporter. Desulfovibrio desulfuricans is the primary producer of sulfide in the
band. These data offer a look at the varied functions of the microbiota in the disease
mat enabling us to develop a functional model of this disease.


WHERE ARE THE CRUSTACEA ON CORAL REEFS, AND DOES IT MATTER?
(Abstract ID: 28503)
Crustaceans are one of the most widespread and speciose marine groups, performing
key ecological roles in many ecosystems. They are one of the most influential taxa in
aquatic trophic networks, providing a major connection between primary production
and higher consumers. To investigate the role of crustaceans in the trophic network of a
coral reef, abundance and biomass of crustaceans within different coral reef microhabitats was examined. Dead coral was by far the most important microhabitat type in terms
of crustacean abundance (mean of 7838 individuals 100 cm−2) and biomass (0.75 g
m−2, wet weight), producing values up to 3 orders of magnitude greater than the least
important microhabitats (the epilithic algal matrix and fine-branching live coral). The importance of crustaceans and dead reef substrates to the trophic structure of coral reefs
was further investigated using wrasses (Family: Labridae), one of the most abundant and
diverse fish families on coral reefs. Gut content analyses found crustaceans in the guts of
93 % of the 30 wrasse genera investigated, with a distinct division between micro- and
macro-crustacean predators: wrasses <80 mm standard length (SL) were predominantly
micro-crustacean feeders, while wrasses >90 mm SL displayed a predominantly macrocrustacean diet. Micro-crustacean predators tended to specialise on specific crustacean
taxa, whereas macro-crustacean predators consumed mostly brachyurans. These
findings highlight the value of complex dead coral microhabitats and the importance of
crustaceans in coral reef trophic networks.



3D PRINTED REEFS AS AN ENRICHMENT FOR NATURAL HABITATS (Abstract
ID: 28855)
Increased insight into the complexity of reef functioning calls for new reef restoration
strategies including updated geometrical designs and materials. In a pilot project in the
Larvotto marine protected area (MPA) in Monaco, the new technology of 3D printing is
currently being tested. Artificial reef (AR) units are being installed to enhance the rocky
reef system of the MPA by creating habitat for sessile organisms and fish. Early 2016, a
series of preparatory tests on material characteristics were carried out using 3D printed
reef units and samples to prepare for an AR installation in the Larvotto MPA in summer
2016. As part of these tests and long-term pilot, samples of the printed material have
been installed in the MPA in 2015 which are being monitored for material and ecological
development. Once the AR units are installed, they will be monitored for their ecological
performance during at least a 2 year monitoring period, along with regular monitoring of
printed material samples. 3D printing technology is a valuable addition to existing reef
restoration strategies allowing for construction of complex, tailored designs, use of native
material such as sand and facilitating easy development, testing and adaptation of prototypes, materials and design processes. In combination with thorough studies on reef building processes and assessment of cost-effective proven production methods, 3D printed
reefs are expected to allow for successful up scaling in projects. This article describes the
3D printing technique, design process and monitoring schedule of the pilot program.

ENHANCING AND RESTORING CORAL REEFS FOR COASTAL DEFENCE: A
SOFT SOLUTION CASE EXAMPLE FROM GRENADA (Abstract ID: 29853)
Coral reefs naturally protect coasts from erosion and flooding by attenuating wave
energy and supplying sediment found on adjacent beaches. However, declines in their
condition coupled with increasing rates of global sea level rise are jeopardizing communities and coastal infrastructure. The typical hard engineering solution to this problem
is to construct breakwaters or groins is to protect high value shorelines even in places
where shallow reef crests occur. Softer solutions such as coral restoration offer a cost effective alternative to traditional engineered solutions in some places. Degraded reefs can
be structurally restored using both biological and physical techniques including the use
of structural materials. However, few reef restoration projects have been designed with
coastal protection as a primary objective and guidelines are lacking. Here we discuss
the process of designing a low crested breakwater structure to restore the wave breaking
properties of a degraded reef crest in Grenada. Structures were designed to withstand
hurricane wave forces, have a minimum 30 year lifespan, and promote coralline algae
and coral growth. A total of 30 meters of pilot structures were constructed in 2015
and installed on a high energy back reef environment using local materials, community
labour, and a specially built shallow water barge. Monitoring results of the pilot structures
suggest they perform similar to traditional submerged breakwaters but have significantly
greater ecological benefits including the potential to enhance natural reef accretionary
processes.


181

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

others in corals, up to 70% were found to be concordantly expressed in both hosts in
response to thermal stress. We are also examining how prior thermal history influences
the tolerance of symbiotic Aiptasia to subsequent thermal stress, finding that acclimation
at elevated but sub-bleaching temperatures (30-32°C) decreases the rate and severity
expression in thermally acclimated animals.


SCALING UP CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF SMALL ISLAND NATIONS THROUGH SCIENCE-BASED LEARNING NETWORKS AND DATA PLATFORMS (Abstract ID: 30076)


The Eastern Caribbean (EC) islands are linked through coral reef ecosystems, oceanic
currents, and a rich cultural heritage. To safeguard the region’s biodiversity, restore fishery
stocks and address climate change concerns, ECMMAN (Climate-Resilient Eastern
Caribbean Marine Managed Areas Network) developed a Learning Network of partners
from 6 EC countries to collect and share data on biodiversity, socioeconomics and
marine management effectiveness. Results are available on CaribNode - an open access,
decision-support web platform with geospatial tools to map the status of the islands
by Healthy Reefs Initiative. Results from a new analysis included data from 277 reef surveys, benthic habitat maps and 44 MMAs. Reef condition examined by geographic zones
and in/outside MMAs varied but several common findings included: Acropora palmata
corals are recovering since 2005; More fleshy seaweed is found on leeward reefs and
near settlements; Diadema populations are high; few large fish occur; and reefs with
complex structure or protection had higher fish abundance. Small island nations rely
heavily on their coastal resources yet chronic local impacts and climate change impacts
threaten their limited resources. The 44 MMAs protect 5% of the shelf area, highlighting
the need to strategically increase protection to meet the Caribbean Challenge’s 20% goal
by 2020. The resilience of these ecosystems will depend on effective local management
and adopting transboundary, adaptive management strategies.

TOWARDS PROTECTING THE GREAT BARRIER REEF FROM LAND-BASED POLLUTION (Abstract ID: 28280)
The Great Barrier Reef (GBR) is an iconic coral reef system extending over 2,000 km
along the north-east coast of Australia. Global recognition of its Outstanding Universal
Value resulted in the listing of the 348,000 km2 GBR World Heritage Area (WHA) by
UNESCO in 1981. Despite various levels of national and international protection, the
condition of GBR ecosystems has deteriorated over the past decades, with land-based
pollution from the adjacent watershed being a major cause for this decline. Moreover,
poor water quality from land-based runoff remains a major threat to the future condition
the evidence on (i) the decline in GBR water quality and ecosystem condition, and (ii) the
effectiveness of the existing initiatives to reduce discharge of land-based pollutants into
GBR waters. We conclude that recent efforts in the GBR watershed to reduce land-based
pollution are not sufficient to protect the GBR ecosystems from declining water quality
within the aspired timeframes. To increase the likelihood of protecting GBR ecosystems
from land-based pollution into the future, we identify incremental improvements that can
be made to current approaches, and highlight potential transformational changes to current agricultural land uses, that may also provide guidance for the management of other
marine ecosystems around the world.


THERMAL STRESS AGGRAVATES THE EFFECT OF OCEAN ACIDIFICATION ON
FOUR CARIBBEAN REEF-BUILDING CORALS (Abstract ID: 28443)


Climate change leads to rising sea surface temperatures and changes in carbon chemistry that result in decreasing ocean pH and aragonite saturation state. Low pH has been
shown to reduce calcification rates of symbiotic corals, but its impact under conditions
of elevated light stress during thermal stress events is not known yet. Light absorbed
in excess and increased photodamage is the main cause of the loss of photosynthetic
activity during thermal stress, so the role of the light stress in this response should not
be ignored. In this study we exposed four species of Caribbean reef-building corals
heat stress conditions (pH8.1-32 °C); low pH (pH7.9-30 °C); and their combined effect
(pH7.9-32 °C) for 10 days under natural light. Exposure to +2 °C in summer induced
a loss of pigmentation, symbionts and photosynthetic activity and calcification due to
increased accumulation of damage in Symbiodinium (decline in Fv/Fm). Low pH did
not adversely affect coral photosynthesis and pigmentation, and only a slight decrease
the ocean in the different global change scenarios, coral reefs are seriously threatened
due to their adverse impact on the physiology of this symbiosis and carbon production,
even prior to undergoing bleaching.

GLOBAL TARGETS FOR MARINE RESERVE COVERAGE ON UNREGULATED
CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 27886)
Marine reserves are the primary tool for biodiversity conservation, but increasingly relied
upon also to manage fisheries, particularly in complex and over-exploited tropical systems. While global agreements define a minimum percentage of habitats to be protected
for more effective conservation, associated impacts on fisheries are unclear and could
weaken food security if over-exploitation increases outside reserves. Here, we present a
systematic analysis of the ability of reserves to rebuild complex and unregulated fisheries, and we identify maximum reserve coverages for biodiversity conservation that are
unlikely to impair long-term fishery performance. We find that large reserves, exporting
less than 30% of larvae, might impair fishery performance, but that realistic reserve
network designs should benefit most complex fisheries. Specifically on coral reefs, where
larval dispersal distances of many target species are likely to exceed their home ranges
as adults, negative fishery impacts are unlikely. Even the modest UN Aichi target of 10%
reserve coverage can then help rebuild depleted catch. However, 20-30% reserve coverage will likely deliver better biodiversity outcomes while not harming healthy fisheries and
allowing for more efficient rebuilding of substantially depleted fish populations and catch.



GENE EXPRESSION UNDER THERMAL STRESS AND THE POTENTIAL FOR
THERMAL ACCLIMATION IN A SYMBIOTIC CNIDARIAN (Abstract ID: 28069)
Despite its central importance for coral-reef ecosystems, the cnidarian-dinoflagellate
symbiosis remains poorly understood at the genetic, molecular, and cellular levels. To
explore the mechanisms underlying this symbiosis and their responses to stress, we used
RNA-Seq to identify genes that are differentially expressed under thermal stress in the
sea-anemone model system Aiptasia. The clonal line CC7 (containing its endogenous
Clade A Symbiodinium symbiont), an aposymbiotic line derived from CC7, and the line
CC7-SSB01 (aposymbiotic CC7 reinfected with a clonal Clade B Symbiodinium strain)
were thermally stressed at 34°C and sampled at intervals for 10 d. We observed a strong
upregulation in the mRNAs for heat-shock and other stress-response proteins at early
time points (0-12 h) but distinct expression patterns when the symbiotic anemones
began to bleach (≥48 h). The expression patterns were similar in all three lines, indicating
that most, at least, are not related specifically to the presence of the endosymbionts.
When we compared differentially expressed genes in Aiptasia to those identified by

IS THE RED SEA CORAL STYLOPHORA PISTILLATA ALREADY PREPARED FOR
FUTURE OCEAN CONDITIONS? (Abstract ID: 28629)
Migration of corals through a hot water bottleneck in the Southern Red Sea, following
the last glacial period, has led to a situation where corals in the Northern Red Sea now

182

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

express high thermal thresholds while living at suboptimal lower temperatures. We tested
to what extent the coralStylophora pistillata is capable of resisting future ocean conditions
as a result of this selection. We combined chlorophyll fluorescence analysis, biochemical markers, and respirometry with state of the art correlative TEM and NanoSIMS
techniques to obtain a holistic picture on the physiological impact of the isolated and
combined effects of temperature (+5°C) and pH (-0.3 units relative to ambient). After 2
due to changes in photochemistry and higher symbiont pigmentation, and we observed
higher values for holobiont productivity with P:R ratios of up to 1.72. No significant
change in the activity of enzymatic antioxidants or daily calcification was detected.
NanoSIMS data revealed that carbon and nitrogen assimilation in the symbiont and
host gastrodermis are negatively affected by isolated temperature stress. However, no
difference in the proportion of symbiont-derived carbon in the host lipids was observed
and neither protein nor overall carbohydrate content was affected in either partner. Our
data point to a high degree of physiological resistance of this coral to the expected
global trends in ocean conditions and emphasize the urgency of reducing local stressors
in this region.
