19

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

jurisdiction are identified for potential translocation programs of listed coral species.



HUMAN DIMENSIONS OF REEF MANAGEMENT PLANNING: CRITICAL ISSUES
ARTICULATED BY INDIGENOUS PRACTITIONERS FROM MICRONESIAN
OUTER ISLANDS: YAP STATE (Abstract ID: 29861)

THE IMPORTANCE OF STRESSOR INTERACTIONS ON MACROALGAE IN
URBAN ENVIRONMENTS WITH COMPLEX REGIMES OF MULTIPLE DISTURBANCES (Abstract ID: 28596)

Coral reefs around the world are suffering from multiple stressors, and human communities relying on reefs and associated resources are trying to manage those resources in the
face of accelerating ecological change. Simultaneously, human communities and their
social structures are changing, and indigenous knowledge is being eroded due to multiple
factors. The One People One Reef project works collaboratively with outer island communities in Micronesia to identify traditional knowledge and management practices,
provide scientific data to local practitioners, and to identify their primary concerns and
issues around reef protection and management. Identification of issues surrounding
reef management is the first step to better understanding how to approach ecological
questions too. In 2014, we convened a Yap outer island workshop with representatives
from 17 outer islands and Atolls to identify primary concerns, traditional methods still in
practice, and collective recommendations. A modified grounded theory approach was
used to identify patterns and key points. This presentation will outline the main findings
from that workshop, with a focus on traditional management, changes in management,
and identification of main areas of concern for outer island communities with respect to
improved management of reefs and resources.

Globally, ecosystems increasingly experience disturbance regime encompassing multiple
stressors, where natural fluxes are amplified by human activities. In the urbanised, eutrophic
environment of Singapore, bivariate smoothed models (GAMs) demonstrated that temperature and phosphate operate interactively, resulting in seasonal modulation of nutrient
impacts on reef macroalgae. Although algae seasonal patterns were maintained, there was
a noticeable reduction of persistent, opportunistic algae groups and reorganisation of dominant groups. Source of acute and chronic stresses in the system were identified and a generality in the patterns of the response of algae functional groups to these stressors was found.
Both synergistic and antagonistic interactive effects were observed in species responses to
the variation in the physico-chemical regime. Antagonistic interactions can mitigate deleterious effects of single stressors, conversely synergistic interactions can exacerbate single
stressor effects in a non-additive manner. Understanding how these interactions operate
enables a departure from the dogmatic categorisation of environmental parameters. This
allows for better decision making, prioritisation in the development of ecological thresholds
and setting of trigger values for management intervention.
de


VERY LOCAL ADAPTATION IN CORAL THERMAL TOLERANCE LIMITS: EVIDENCE FROM 2.5 COUNTRIES, 2 OCEANS, AND 2 SPECIES (Abstract ID: 29704)
It is well known that the same species of coral from different latitudes can differ in
bleaching thresholds by as much as a few degrees. This has historically been attributed
from different micro-habitats within the same reef-system separated by only 500m to
5km can differ in bleaching tolerance by as much as or more than corals from contrasting latitudes 100s - 1000s of kilometers apart. Here, we present data comparing the
response of corals from three study sites to experimental heat stress: a set of shallow
back-reef pools in American Samoa, a nearshore and offshore patch reef in the Florida
Keys, and a back reef and fore reef in Belize. In all three cases, corals from the microhabitats with the highest amount of daily variability in temperature showed the greatest
resistance to bleaching compared to conspecifics from sites with more stable temperatures. These differences were consistent despite long periods of common garden acclimation (30, 36, and 240 days for Belizean, Samoan, and Floridian corals respectively),
and similar symbiont types. As a whole, these results combined with those of other
recent studies suggest that the amount of thermal variability may play an important role
in shaping coral bleaching thresholds and that local adaptation may be as common at
within-reef scales as it is thought to be across latitudinal gradients in ocean temperatures.

WATER QUALITY LINKED TO ABUNDANCE AND PHYSIOLOGY OF DOMINANT
SOFT CORALS IN JAKARTA BAY, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 28311)
Declining water quality is a main reason for coral reef degradation in the Thousand
Islands off the megacity Jakarta, Indonesia. Shifts in benthic community composition to
higher soft coral abundances have been reported for many degraded reefs throughout
the Indo-Pacific. However, it is not clear to what extent soft coral abundance and
physiology are influenced by water quality. In this study, benthic community composition
were assessed at three sites (<20km north of Jakarta) in Jakarta Bay (JB) and five sites
along the outer Thousand Islands (20–60km north of Jakarta), along with measurements of photosynthetic yield and respiratory electron transport system (ETS) activity
of two dominant soft corals, Sarcophyton sp. and Nephthea sp. Findings revealed highly
eutrophic water conditions in JB compared to the outer Thousand Islands, with 44%
higher DIN load (7.65μM/L), 67% higher turbidity (1.49 NTU) and 47% higher sedimentation rate (30.4g m-2 d-1). Soft corals dominated within the bay (2.4% hard and 12.8%
soft coral cover) compared to the outer Thousand Islands (28.3% hard and 6.9% soft
coral cover). Soft coral abundances, photosynthetic yield, and ETS activity were highly
correlated with key water quality parameters, particularly DIN and sedimentation rates.
The findings suggest water quality controls abundance and physiology of dominant soft
corals in JB and may thus contribute to phase shifts from hard to soft coral dominance,
highlighting the need to better manage water quality.


TRANSLOCATION OF CORAL POPULATIONS TO ENHANCE THERMAL TOLERANCE: PERSPECTIVES UNDER THE ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT (Abstract ID:
29828)


Reef-building corals face a precarious situation of continued decline, and the recent
expansion of coral species listings under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) reflects
increased governmental concern and elevated conservation potential. Intra-regional
translocation—informed by in situ and satellite data on current temperature regimes and
model forecasts of future warming—of coral colonies predisposed to higher ambient
temperatures may stave off regional coral species extinctions or the loss of reef ecosystem function by redistributing genetic thermal tolerance traits of symbionts and/or coral
hosts. Although active translocation efforts are associated with inherent biological risks
of vectoring invasive species and disturbing local genetic makeup, these risks can be mitigated through regulating procedures and the limiting of geographic translocation distance.
Other examples of translocations of ESA-listed vertebrate and plant species illustrate the
propensity for conservation efforts to reflect elevated risks when the species conservation
status worsens. Using textual analysis of the ESA and case precedent, the appropriate risk
thresholds are identified to ensure the continued survival of listed coral species. Under
the ESA there may be a higher impetus to translocate listed coral species as opposed to

IMPACTS OF THE 2015-2016 EL NIÑO ON KIRITIMATI, THE WORLD’S LARGEST
ATOLL (Abstract ID: 30125)
The 2015-2016 El Niño, which triggered the third ever global coral bleaching event,
provided an extraordinary opportunity to rigorously examine the factors that govern reef
resilience to thermal stressors. Such knowledge is crucial for developing targeted coral
reef conservation strategies under climate change. Located in the central equatorial
Pacific, Kiritimati (Christmas) atoll was at the epicenter of this El Niño event; the atoll
was on Bleaching Alert 2 for many months. As the world’s largest atoll by land mass,
Kiritimati also has an unparalleled gradient of coral reef conditions: human impacts are
concentrated at the NW corner of the atoll and reefs there are highly degraded, while at
the other end of the atoll, the coral reefs are amongst the world’s most pristine. Together,
these attributes make Kiritimati an ideal location to learn about which corals can
survive extreme heat stress events, which properties underlie coral reef resilience, and
if bleaching impacts are minimized in areas with fewer local stressors. Here, we present
new results from studies at twenty of our long-term monitoring sites across Kiritimati’s
20

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

local disturbance gradient, which were conducted during six field expeditions carried out
before (n=3) and during (n=3) the 2015-2016 El Niño event. We will synthesize the evidence of El Niño impacts on Kiritimati from our field data, which includes data from 500
corals tagged and tracked throughout the event, detailed photo data, in situ temperature
and water quality instruments, and fisheries data.


MICRO-RNA MEDIATED HOST TRANSCRIPTOME MODULATION IN THE
CNIDARIAN-DINOFLAGELLATE ENDOSYMBIOSIS OF AIPTASIA (Abstract ID:
27840)


The functional endosymbiosis of a cnidarian coral host and photosynthetic dinoflagellate algae of the genus Symbiodinium forms the trophic and structural basis of coral-reef
ecosystems. The acquisition of Symbiodinium from the environment during larval development or during the recovery from stress-induced symbiosis breakdown (“bleaching”) is
generally accompanied by specific alterations in host gene expression. However, the precise regulatory mechanisms modulating the cnidarian host transcriptome are not known.
Here we present evidence for post-transcriptional gene regulation by miRNAs in the
small sea anemone Aiptasia, a model system for cnidarian-dinoflagellate endosymbiosis.
We find that Aiptasia encodes mainly species-specific miRNAs and provide evidence
for recent differentiation of miRNAs within the Aiptasia genome that are commonly
conserved among anthozoans. Our analysis of miRNA expression shows that both
conserved and species-specific host miRNAs are differentially expressed in response to
endosymbiont infection and maintenance of the algal endosymbiosis. Using cross-linking
immunoprecipitations (CLIP) of Argonaute, the central protein of the miRNA-induced
silencing complex, we identified miRNA binding sites on a transcriptome wide scale and
find that symbiotically regulated miRNAs are modulating genes involved in Symbiodinium infection. Taken together, our findings provide evidence for an effective role of
miRNAs in modulating the host transcriptome during the onset and maintenance of the
cnidarian-dinoflagellate endosymbiosis.

MACROALGAL BROWSING ON A HEAVILY DEGRADED, URBANIZED EQUATORIAL CORAL REEF SYSTEM (Abstract ID: 29319)
The removal of macroalgal biomass is a key process in maintaining a healthy balance
between corals and algae on tropical reefs. Numerous studies have quantified rates of
macroalgal herbivory using bioassays, however most have been conducted in areas
with relatively low macroalgae cover (<5%) and abundant and diverse herbivorous fish
populations. This raises the question of whether these studies are representative of
degraded coral reef systems where coral cover, and the biomass of herbivorous fishes
are markedly lower, and algal biomass substantially higher. Here, we surveyed herbivorous fish communities and quantified their capacity to remove the fleshy macroalga
Sargassum ilicifolium using bioassays on multiple reefs in Singapore; a highly degraded
biomass varied significantly among reefs (1.2–73.4% 4.5 h-1), but spatial variation was
consistent between days, suggesting the strong localized effects of environment and
behavior in the component species. Interestingly, despite strong spatial differences video
footage revealed that a single species, Siganus virgatus, was almost solely responsible
virgatus accounted for 82.1% (4,353) of the total bites. These findings not only highlight
the limited redundancy within this system, but importantly that substantial macroalgal
removal occurs on these reefs and that there is a need to assess the functional roles of
individual species even on degraded reefs.


GENETIC DATA INDICATES THAT HYBRIDIZATION BETWEEN CARIBBEAN
ELKHORN AND STAGHORN CORALS IS A LIKELY MECHANISM FOR RAPID
ADAPTATION (Abstract ID: 28347)


Current models predict the demise of reefs in the next 200 years. It is thus essential to
identify habitats, taxa and evolutionary mechanisms that will allow some coral species
to maintain their role as foundation fauna. Hybridization can provide an avenue for
adaptation to changing conditions and corals hybridize with some frequency. But results
may range from the introduction of just a few alleles into existing parent species via
introgression, to the birth of a new, perhaps better adapted genetic lineage. Here, we
palmata. In the past, hybrid colonies originating from natural crosses between elkhorn
and staghorn corals were rare, and only infrequent hybrid reproduction with staghorn
coral was evident, limiting the evolutionary potential of this hybrid system. New genetic
and genomic data indicate that hybrids are now mating with each other, demonstrating
the potential for the formation of a new species. Further, hybrids appear to be capable
of mating with both staghorn and elkhorn coral, perhaps leading to gene flow between
the parent species via the hybrid. Recent field observations suggest that the hybrid is
increasing and its ecological role is changing throughout the Caribbean. These hybrids
appear to be less affected by the disease that led to the mass mortality of their parental
species in recent decades. Hybrids are also found thriving in shallow habitats with high
temperatures and irradiance suggesting they may be less susceptible to future warming
scenarios. Hybridization is thus a possible and probable mechanism for coral adaptation
to changing conditions in the Caribbean.

INFLUENCE OF THERMAL HISTORY AND NUTRIENT ENRICHMENT ON
CORAL AND SYMBIONT COMMUNITY STRUCTURE ON LAGOONAL REEFS ON
THE BELIZE MESOAMERICAN BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 28070)
Coral reefs are increasingly threatened by rising seawater temperature and humaninduced nutrient enrichment. Unclear is how spatiotemporal variations of these
environmental stressors across a reefscape determine which coral species will be
most successful during this climate change interval. Using a novel metric, we classified
lagoonal reefs on the Belize Mesoamerican Barrier Reef as enduring low, moderate, or
extreme temperature parameters (lowTP, modTP, and extTP, respectively) over the past
decade using satellite-derived ultra-high resolution sea surface temperature records. Bulk
nutrient concentrations were determined for each site from satellite-derived chl a proxy
complemented with in-situ nutrient measurements. Reefs classified into one of the three
thermal parameters were surveyed and coral tissue samples were collected to classify
the symbiont community. Coral abundance, diversity, percent cover, and species richness
were significantly lower at extTP sites compared to lowTP and modTP sites, which did
not differ from each other. Coral community differences between extTP and lowTP/
modTP sites were primarily driven by temperature differences. The influence of nutrients
on coral communities was minimal. Metabarcoding of the ITS2 gene will reveal how
Symbiodinium communities vary across host species and between reef environments
and will elucidate how temperature and nutrients drive patterns in holobiont communities. Coral communities at extTP sites warrant additional protected status, as they may
be better adapted to withstand future ocean conditions.


GENOMIC SIGNATURES OF HABITAT ADAPTATION ARE MIRRORED BY PHENOTYPIC DIFFERENCES IN THE CORAL POCILLOPORA DAMICORNIS (Abstract
ID: 28959)
The future of coral reefs is uncertain. Increasing environmental pressures are causing
stress and decreases in coral fitness, cover and diversity are evident on reefs world-wide.
The outlook depends on corals’ ability to increase stress tolerance and thrive under
novel, and often more extreme, environmental conditions. To provide critical knowledge
of the adaptive potential of natural populations we reciprocally transplanted fragments
ofPocillopora damicornis between environmentally distinct reef flat and slope habitats


21

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

strong genotype by environment interactions in fitness-related traits; skeletal growth was
3.5 times higher and partial mortality was 3.2 times lower in native vs novel habitats.
Field and lab experiments found higher stress tolerance in native corals from the more
environmentally extreme reef flat habitat, with transplanted slope individuals achieving
intermediate tolerance levels after 18 months. Analysis across 23,500 SNPs identified
strong genetic differentiation between habitats and a large number of private alleles were
associated with habitats but not sites. Our results are consistent with local adaptation of
coral populations across very small geographical distances and reveal standing genetic
variation for enhanced temperature tolerance in natural populations. Combined, our phenotypic and genomic data support a substantial adaptive potential of this coral species
that should be considered in projection models under emission and natural management
scenarios


PROJECTING RESPONSES IN STRESSED MARINE SYSTEMS (PRISMS): MEASURING AND PROJECTING MULTIPLE LOCAL THREATS AT A GLOBAL SCALE
(Abstract ID: 28379 | Poster ID: 426)
PREDICTS (Projecting Responses of Ecological Diversity In Changing Terrestrial
Systems) is an ongoing collaborative project which uses a meta-analytic approach to
investigate how local biodiversity typically responds to human pressures such as landuse change and infrastructure, thereby improving our ability to predict future biodiversity
already been extremely successful at synthesising raw data from scientists worldwide in
order to produce a global database of terrestrial species’ responses to human pressures
(now having over 3 million biodiversity records from over 27,000 sites, covering more
than 47,000 species). We are now extending the methodology to shallow coastal benthic
marine communities at a global scale within the ‘PRISMS’ project, looking at local
ecological community change according to associated anthropogenic pressures (primarily land-use change). This is with the aim to compare local within-sample taxon richness,
rarefaction-based taxon richness, total abundance, and compositional turnover across
regional and global scales, along gradients of human pressure. The responses of reef
site-level diversity to the measures of anthropogenic land-use change are modelled using
generalized linear mixed effects models. Models will also be projected onto future scenarios of anthropogenic and environmental pressure variables to aid reef management.


EVOLUTIONARY RESCUE AND GENOMIC ADAPTATION TO OCEAN WARMING
(Abstract ID: 28245)
Persistence of coral populations through warming ocean temperatures will require
adaptation to new climates. Although many studies have used genomic data to examine
the potential genetic basis of this adaptation by searching for climate-associated variation, few have applied their findings to predict evolution under future climate change
scenarios. Here, we examine the probability of adaptation in a low latitude population
of reef-building corals from Rarotonga, Cook Islands. Using candidate single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with thermal tolerance from a previous study in
the same species, we simulate population trajectories with selective regimes reflective
of warming scenarios. We find substantial capacity for adaptation to warming in the
Rarotonga population, but this estimate is highly dependent on both population growth
rate and the rate of warming. In addition, we show that spatially heterogeneous habitats
may increase the likelihood of evolutionary rescue through assortative mating of more
fit genotypes. Merging empirical genomic data with evolutionary models offers a promising method for integrating adaptive processes into predictions of species response to
climate change.


CORAL-ALGAL DYNAMICS UNDER FUTURE CARBON DIOXIDE SCENARIOS
AND EUTROPHICATION (Abstract ID: 28306 | Poster ID: 112)
Coral reefs are threatened by the consequences of increasing atmospheric carbon
dioxide (CO2) leading to seawater warming and acidification, and eutrophication from
crop-fertilization. Many studies suggested that algae will dominate corals in the future;
however, multiple stressors provoke complex responses and their combined impacts on
corals, algae and their interactions are unknown. This research focused explicitly on the
synergistic effects of seawater warming and acidification under presence and absence of
eutrophication on the survival of key reef organisms and their interactions under simulated present and future CO2 scenarios. Winter experiments were carried out on Heron
Island, Southern Great Barrier Reef, in which Acropora pulchra coral fragments and thalli
of the tropical brown algae Chnoospora implexa, both alone and in interaction, were
exposed to present and “business-as-usual” pCO2 and seawater temperature (RCP8.5; +
570 μatm pCO2 and + 4°C), and to ambient and elevated inorganic nutrients (2.5 μmol
L-1 ammonium and 1.25 μmol L-1 phosphate). Performance and function of corals and
algae were assessed by measuring growth, productivity, pigments, and tissue nutrient
content. Preliminary results showed no negative interaction between algae attached to
corals under any treatment. While algae had a significant mortality after experimental
mid-term, coral fragments showed growth and an increase in pigmentation in treatments
with elevated nutrients. The outcome of this study will provide robust experimental
evidence of the fate of future coral reefs’ integrity.

com

RECENT BFAR INITIATIVES RELATING TO EAFM (Abstract ID: 29193 | Poster ID:
577)
This paper will present EAFM initiatives of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic
Resources(BFAR) as the primary agency responsible for the conservation and Management of Fisheries in the Philippines. It will include the various management plans/
programs/projects/measures for specific fisheries being implemented in various parts
of the country, the recently formulated Comprehensive National Fisheries Industry
Development Plan, and other related activities. The process of formulation and implementation of these plans/programs/projects/measures and how they relate to EAFM
will be described.
com


THE ECOSYSTEM APPROACH TO FISHERIES MANAGEMENT (EAFM) FRAMEWORK IN THE CONTEXT OF FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN THE PHILIPPINES
(Abstract ID: 29333)

NO-TAKE MARINE PROTECTED AREAS ALTER BENTHIC COMMUNITIES WITH
CASCADING POSITIVE EFFECTS ON CORAL SETTLEMENT AND LARVAL AND
RECRUIT SURVIVORSHIP (Abstract ID: 28020 | Poster ID: 629)

The Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM) includes a wider scope
of implementation than the fisheries management practiced in the last decades. While
the conventional and traditional fisheries management mostly involved activities that
focused only on the fisheries sector, the EAFM takes into consideration a broader and
multi-sectoral participation; promotes good governance; and utilizes traditional and
scientific knowledge to support appropriate adaptive management strategies. The
Philippines is mainstreaming and integrating the EAFM concept into the management
of various fisheries. In the Philippine context, several successful initiatives will be shared
highlighting policy reform, institutional and structural reforms, infrastructure support,
broad multi-sectoral collaboration, and promotion of the human well-being.

Macroalgae can harm corals via numerous mechanisms and coral larvae avoid cues
from many species of macroalgae in settlement and flume experiments. However,
coral larvae may not be able to avoid settlement near macroalgae with reefs globally
becoming more degraded due to increasing anthropogenic stressors. We tested for
the effect of substrates from a coral-dominated no-take marine protected area (MPA)
compared to substrates from an adjacent fished reef dominated by macroalgae on larval
settlement and recruit survivorship of the coral Pocillopora damicornis. We also tested
for differences in survivorship of larvae from MPA and fished reefs when maintained in
water collected from each reef. Larvae from both MPAs and fished areas initially (≤ 24 h)

22

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

avoided settlement on macroalgal-fouled substrate collected from the fished area, but no
longer avoided settlement after 48 h. When out-planted to the protected or fished area,
larvae from both areas experienced higher post-settlement survivorship at 4 and 26 days
within the MPA than the fished area. Larvae from the fished area had lower survivorship
than larvae from the MPA and this effect was exacerbated when larvae were maintained
MPAs improve coral settlement and survivorship at multiple life stages. Protected areas
may also select for healthier microbial communities. We are currently investigating
microbial effects in the observed settlement and survivorship patterns between fished
and protected reefs.


ISLANDS OF SEA: THE ROLE OF ISOLATION IN SPATIAL PATTERNS OF MARINE BIODIVERSITY (Abstract ID: 29530)
Phylogeographic studies in the Coral Triangle have shown that populations of coral
reef organisms are more structured than previously assumed and that isolation at small
spatial scales may play an important role in forming the observed spatial patterns of
genetic diversity. Isolation can affect genetic diversity due to physical barriers, irrespective of environment, and/or due to different environmental regimes. A key issue is that
environmental data is generally spatially structured at multiple scales and will change
over time, thereby clouding the ultimate cause of divergence and differentiation. Here
we use the clearly defined spatio-temporal context of marine lakes – islands of sea - to
study how gene flow corresponds with environmental gradients. Marine lakes are landlocked water bodies that maintain a marine character with coral reef organisms through
narrow submarine connections to the sea. By comparing marine lakes in Indonesia,
with comparable ages and sizes, but varying degrees of connection to the open sea and
differing environmental regimes, we aim to test the relative contribution of dispersal
limitation due to barriers versus selective environments in the formation of marine
biodiversity patterns. We will present preliminary data of our study on multiple marine
lineages (sponges, mussels, jellyfish) across the marine lake model system based on
population genomic techniques (RADSeq). Understanding how geneflow corresponds
with environmental gradients will improve predictions on adaptive capacities of species
under different climate change scenarios.


MANAGEMENT POLICIES AS RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ALL SCIENTISTS
(Abstract ID: 28748)
The Public Access to Research Results (PARR) policy is being implemented across all
federal agencies in the United States. It requires all data collected with federal funds
be made publicly available in a timely manner. As part of it’s implementation plan, the
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has put a series of
directives into place to address issues of data management, including, but not limited
to, access, documentation and data citation. The Coral Reef Conservation Program
(CRCP) funds the majority of projects dealing with shallow water coral reefs across
different NOAA offices. These projects collect a wide variety of data from satellite
derived products to in water monitoring. This range of data types along with differing
office requirements provides a unique set of data management challenges. I will present
an overview of how we are currently managing data within CRCP and talk about how
these management practices are good recommendations for all coral reef researchers.
Some of these recommendations include tools that are available to the wider research
community. Data science is increasingly an important tool for resource management;
this requires coral data managers to evolve how they manage and share coral data.
Open access to publications and data is becoming more often a requirement rather than
a recommendation, and as rigorous as scientists can be on their collection methodology,
they should be equally as rigorous on how they manage their data. It is only through
proper management that data can be made useful into the future.


CARBON AND NITROGEN FIXATION BY REEF ORGANISMS AND SUBSTRATES
IN RESPONSE TO SEASONAL CHANGES (Abstract ID: 27985)
Tropical coral reefs are among the marine ecosystems with the highest C fixation rates,
although they are surrounded by very oligotrophic waters. This reef paradox is not yet
completely understood. However, it is evident that mechanisms must be in place allowing extraction of essential elements, particularly new nitrogen. Several key reef C-fixing
dead corals and rocky surfaces), exhibit internal or external associations with N-fixing
microbes like cyanobacteria. Such associations potentially facilitate primary production,
but there are no studies that address the potential linkage between C and N fixation in
coral reefs under the influence of potentially controlling environmental factors. This
contribution will thus present data from a series of experiments conducted during all
four seasons at a high-latitude reef location in the Northern Red Sea, thereby exhibiting
strong seasonality in key water parameters. Findings revealed a widespread occurrence
of N fixation by diazotrophs associated with all major groups of reef organisms and substrates and a cross-organism linkage between C and N fixation when inorganic nutrient
availability in the water column was lowest. Extrapolation of our data also characterize
coral reefs among the most active N-fixing marine ecosystems. This comprehensive
dataset will help to gain new important insights in coral reef ecosystem functioning and
resilience in a time of environmental change.


BUILT CAPITAL AND PEOPLE PROTECTED BY CORAL REEFS GLOBALLY, NOW
AND IN THE FUTURE (Abstract ID: 29593)
Climate change and coastal development are dramatically increasing risks to people
and property and to losses of coastal habitats. Exposure to flooding is increasing from
the combined influence of coastal storms, changes in sea levels, land subsidence, urban
development, population growth and geomorphic change. The need to upgrade existing
flood protection and to plan for future risks is becoming increasingly apparent, as are the
costs. This is driving billions of dollars to reduce those risks, creating both threats and
opportunities for ecosystems. Habitat loss will further expose communities and assets to
flooding and erosion. However, there very limited estimates of the actual asset value and
people directly protected by ecosystems worldwide. We combined ecological, engineering and economic approaches to estimate the benefit we get from coral reefs across
the globe, by comparing the present situation with a loss of 1m in height of coral reefs
globally and scenarios that account for a future of sea level rise and reef degradation.
The results are revealing. For example, as compared to the flooding currently predicted
for 100-year events, the loss of just 1 m in coral reef height globally would trigger added
flooding of more than 16,000 km2 affecting an additional 8 million people and $US186
billion in built capital; a 92% increase in storm costs. Some of the hotspots that enjoy
the greatest benefit from coral reef nowadays are in rank order from SE Asia and the
Middle East. The countries that have their total built capital protected by coral reefs
Grenada, Philippines).


NITROGEN ACQUISITION VIA DIAZOTROPHY IN COLD-WATER, TEMPERATE
AND TROPICAL CORALS (Abstract ID: 29273)


Dinitrogen (N2) fixation by specialized prokaryotes (diazotrophs) represents an important
source of bioavailable nitrogen (N) in the world’s ocean. Among marine ecosystems
tropical coral reefs have been identified as hotspots of N2 fixation that may facilitate their
high productivity despite being surrounded by oligotrophic waters. Recently, cold-water

23

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

coral associated N2 fixation has also been demonstrated suggesting that coral-diazotroph
associations are ubiquitous over large spatial and latitudinal scales. Several studies shed
light on the abundance and diversity of coral-associated diazotrophic communities or
quantified the amount of N2fixation, while direct evidence for the uptake and metabolic
usage of N2fixation products by the coral host is still lacking. Thus, this talk will present a
series of 15N2 tracer experiments following the net incorporation of freshly fixed N2 into
uptake of fixed N2 was comparatively investigated between cold-water, temperate and
tropical corals to assess the specific nutritional importance of coral-associated N2fixation
for corals thriving in very diverse environmental settings.

AND SPHECIOSPONGIA VAGABUNDA (PHYLUM: PORIFERA) FROM MAURITIUS
(Abstract ID: 27876 | Poster ID: 294)
The macrofaunal communities associated with two distinct sponge species (Haliclona
sp. and Spheciospongia vagabunda) were assessed along the east and south west coasts
of Mauritius. Sponge samples were collected at a depth range of 0.5 – 2 m, dissected
and the associated macrofaunal communities were collected, sorted and identified to
the lowest possible taxonomic level. Faunistic associations were determined through
cluster analysis using the Bray-Curtis similarity (PRIMER 6). A total of 26 macroinvertebrate species belonging to six taxonomic groups were recorded. Polychaeta was the
most dominant taxa in terms of the number of individuals (51% of the total individuals)
and Crustacea constituted the highest number of species (13 species). The polychaete
Haplosyllis djiboutiensis and the brittle star Ophiactis savignyi were the most abundant
associated species recorded. The numbers of individuals and the diversity index values
were positively correlated the sponge volume. This study is among the first records on
sponge-associated macrofauna in Mauritius and supports the importance of marine
sponges as habitats for macro-invertebrates.



INVESTIGATING CORAL REEF GRAZING AS A NATURAL CONTROL OF
INCREASED ALGAL GROWTH IN TWO HAWAI’I NATIONAL PARKS (Abstract ID:
30047)
Recent studies in Hawai'i have shown that increased coastal nutrient inputs can
accelerate nuisance algal growth in coral reef ecosystems. However, in areas with sufficient grazer density, excessive algal growth may be controlled. Our study investigated
the top-down effects of grazing and the bottom-up effects of benthic nutrient inputs
(through submarine groundwater discharge) on algal turf growth within two Hawai’i
parks (Kaloko-Honokōhau NHP and Kalaupapa NHP). Increased algal growth was
significantly correlated with greater benthic nutrient concentrations at both parks. Different grazer assemblages were studied within each park with visual and video sampling,
and macroalgal grazing assays reflected differences in grazer effects on algal biomass at
each park. In 2013-14, algal turf grazing experiments with controlled/excluded herbivory
treatments were used to document significant grazer effects on algal turf biomass, with
urchin-dominated grazing at Kaloko-Honokōhau and fish-dominated grazing at Kalaupapa. These findings provide valuable information on the role of herbivores in Hawaiian
marine systems and similar regional environments, and emphasize the importance of
management of herbivores in tropical marine systems.

LIFE BEGINS AT 40: TOWARDS RESILIENCE-BASED MANAGEMENT OF THE
The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority turned 40 years old in 2015. Like middle
aged humans, the future of Great Barrier Reef ecosystems is dependent upon actions
that sustain health. Since 1975 the GBRMPA has been adaptively managing the Marine
Park to protect the outstanding universal value of this global icon. Actions such as
the original (1975) and revised (2004) zoning have minimised extractive activities and
ongoing water quality improvement measures are addressing 150 years of coastal development. However, like reefs worldwide, legacy and current human and environmental
pressures are challenging the capacity of GBR ecosystems to tolerate and recover from
impacts. In the coming decades the increasing effects of climate change combined with
existing pressures threaten to overwhelm the capacity of conventional management
arrangements to protect the Reef. In response to these mounting pressures the GBRMPA
is working to enhance resilience through the Reef 2050 long-term sustainability plan.
The GBRMPA is partnering with Australian and international managers, researchers
and non-governmental organisations to translate resilience science into practical future
focused adaptive management strategies. This presentation outlines some of the ongoing strategic, tactical, stewardship, monitoring and evaluation actions that have been
developed over the past decade to trial and enable resilience-based management of the
world’s largest coral reef system.


BENTHIC ALGAL GROWTH IN RESPONSE TO SUBMARINE GROUNDWATER
DISCHARGE IN TWO HAWAI‘I NATIONAL PARKS (Abstract ID: 30058)
Kaloko-Honokōhau and Kalaupapa National Historical Parks, experience sizable inputs
of submarine groundwater discharge, which can supply large volumes of nutrient-laden
freshwater from to coastal environments, potentially yielding nuisance algal growth. To
investigate nearshore ecosystem responses to land-based inputs, known shoreline seeps
and several randomly selected benthic stations were sampled in both parks during a
four-year investigation. Nutrient concentrations were documented to be spatially and
temporally variable. Generally, nutrient concentrations were not large from subtidal
benthic stations compared to shoreline seep values. Results of macroalgae and algal turf
growth experiments showed that algal growth varied greatly between parks and was associated with specific nutrient concentrations. Algal tissue analysis (N15) did not indicate
sewage sources for available nutrients at selected benthic stations.



24

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

the functional impairment of less manoeuvrable species. We argue that the significance
of certain environmental filters may be overridden by those stemming from selective
human activities. Extending our approach to further ecological processes and factors that
may supress species functions, can help refine spatial predictions of ecosystem function,
and assist conservation planning aimed at sustaining resilience to disturbance.

OPERATIONALISING THE MANAGEMENT OF CORAL REEF RESILIENCE
(Abstract ID: 29127)
Coral reefs are globally imperilled, with more frequent and severe disturbance events
reinforcing the ecosystem’s retrogression and impacting their ability to recover. The
literature often highlights that managers should aim to conserve the most resilient reefs,
environmental conditions. Thus far, a hurdle to protecting resilient reefs has been that
resilience plays out over long time-scales and is difficult to quantify in objective-based
decision-making. Our paper aims to operationalize the management of coral reef resilience in quantitative terms and present a framework to maximise both mean resilience
and cost effectiveness in reef management. By understanding their past responses to
disturbances, we aim to predict the reefs’ future resilience. Here, we estimate the mean
long-term resilience of coral reefs on a global scale based on the understanding that
resilience is governed by exposure rates to multiple disturbances, the sensitivity of reefs
to a disturbance, and the rates of recovery. We estimate these components on a global
scale based on long-term studies, and predict long-term reef trajectories with simple
stochastic models. Our approach is based on factors of resilience that can be measured
and managed, providing a framework for selecting management actions on the basis of
local reef ecosystem trends and financial and logistical constraints of management.


RETENTION MECHANISMS AND SELF-RECRUITMENT IN A CORAL REEF FISH
(Abstract ID: 28423)
The distance traveled and trajectories taken by marine larvae during dispersal are likely
influenced by larval behaviors as well as oceanographic features. Passive retention
mechanisms, such as eddies, are thought to enhance self-recruitment, that is, the return
of larvae to their natal population. Exact locations of hatching and settlement of selfrecruiting larvae enable tests of expected patterns of dispersal based on known patterns
of water circulation. Using parentage inference based on multiple sampling years in
Moorea, French Polynesia we describe spatial and temporal variation in self-recruitment
of the coral reef orangefin anemonefish, evaluate the consistency of net dispersal distances of self-recruits against the null expectation of passive particle dispersal, and test
the hypothesis that larvae originating in certain reef habitats (lagoons and passes) would
be retained and thus more likely to self-recruit than those originating on the outer (fore)
reef. Estimates of known self-recruitment were consistent across the sampling years
(~ 25-27% of sampled recruits). The vast majority (92%) of the larvae born on Moorea
showed a net distance between hatching and settlement locations that was within the
average maximum dispersal distance expected of a neutrally-buoyant passive particle.
However, a parent of a given body size on the outer (fore) reef of Moorea was less
likely than those on lagoon reefs or in passes to produce self-recruits. Our findings show
that even simple dispersal models that simulate the spatial scale and direction of larval
dispersal can provide insight into landscape-scale retention patterns of reef fishes.


DEEP LEARNING IN THE SHALLOW SEAS: USING COLLABORATIVE PLATFORMS AND DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS TO GREATLY ADVANCE AUTOMATED
ANALYSIS OF CORAL REEF SURVEY IMAGERY (Abstract ID: 28730)
Modern robotics and imaging technology enable rapid collection of large coral reef
image surveys. However, the subsequent image-annotation required to extract data for
ecological analysis is time-consuming and expensive, creating a manual annotation
bottleneck between collected imagery and required data. We present an algorithmic
framework and a collaborative platform to address this bottleneck.
2 years. During this time, over 150,000 coral reef survey images have been uploaded as
part of 288 different reef surveys, and annotated with over 4 million point annotations by
347 coral reef experts. Through the CoralNet interactive annotation tool, users already
leverage automated image analysis to reduce the manual annotation work by 50%.
Using this wealth of data, we have developed the next generation automated annotation methods, using deep neural networks with 138 million parameters organized in 16
convolutional layers. Using these networks, we can further reduce the annotation burden
so that, on average, only 20% of the annotation work remains for the human annotator.
Remarkably, for surveys conducted with sufficient image quality, fully automated annotation is possible with no reduction of annotation quality compared manual annotation.
As more data is uploaded and verified, the CoralNet vision back-end will continue to
evolve, creating a positive feedback loop to encourage further collaboration and enable
rapid and accurate image based reef surveys.


Our view of the evolution of coral reefs, and fishes in particular, has been largely based
on changes in the diversity of taxa. The fossil record places taxa at particular locations
and points in time, while phylogenies identify relationships and the timing of divergence
events. It is only when these data are considered in a functional context that we can
begin to reconstruct the ecology of past reefs. The overarching goal of our research
has been to develop a picture of ancient reefs as working functional ecosystems. In this
way we can examine changes through time in terms of how reefs operated, rather than
documenting the diversity of key lineages. In this presentation I will provide an overview
of our recent research on the evolution of major functional traits in reef fishes, detailing
how these traits influence the use of reefs by fishes, and how reefs have changed as a
consequence. I will also examine the implications of these changes for the future of
coral reefs at a global scale. Remarkably, the future of coral reefs appears to be returning
to a distant past. Human activities are selectively undermining the last 30 million years
of coral reef evolution, producing reefs that closely resemble their ancient counterparts.

de


ENVIRONMENTALLY MEDIATED MATERNAL EFFECTS IN STYLOPHORA
ID: 482)
It is typically reported that 1°C above the local maximum monthly mean (MMM) sea
temperature can result in coral bleaching. Despite increasing sea temperatures in line
with the global rate, and recurring positive temperature anomalies, coral bleaching is
rarely reported in the Gulf of Aqaba, Red Sea (GoA). Experiments conducted with the
locally important Stlyophora pistillata sustained for 2 weeks at 5°C above MMM, resulted
in few of the common bleaching signs. As a result, the GoA has been putatively identified
as a refuge and a potential donor site for assisted colonisation and restoration projects.
However, this prospect depends upon the continued ability for local species to adapt
to further change and pass on favourable traits to enhance offspring fitness. The link
between adult health and parental investment is not well understood in corals. Therefore,
field sampling and experiments were conducted to investigate how the environmental
experience of the parental colony influences offspring traits and how this may affect
planulates throughout the entire regional sea temperature range (21 – 29°C). This offers

FILTERING OF CORAL REEF FISH HERBIVORY ALONG A GRADIENT OF WAVE
EXPOSURE (Abstract ID: 28012)
Quantifying the heterogeneity of ecological processes is crucial to understand spatial
patterns of ecosystem function. Here we quantify the spatial variability of coral reef
fish herbivory and, using a trait-based approach we measure species swimming
performance, and determine whether wave exposure acts as an environmental filter of
herbivore feeding function. Species with distinct feeding strategies differed in swimming
performance. Although high wave exposure impairs the feeding function of 22% of
species, it doubles overall herbivore feeding intensity without affecting the percentages
accounted for by grazers and scrapers. The likely antagonistic effect of wave exposure
on fish feeding behaviour and algal productivity makes herbivory relatively resilient to
25

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

adequate levels of connectivity of these small benthic fishes if habitat in between them
is extirpated. Given that overall reef fish diversity is driven by species with life histories
similar to that of the yellowhead jawfish, managers face a challenge to develop strategies
that allow connectivity and avoid isolation of populations and their extinction.

a rare chance to assess planulae fitness across in situ and experimental environmental
gradients. Results from these studies give insights into how offspring viability is environmentally mediated and offers considerations for active restoration projects.


WATER SECURITY IN SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES: APPLYING A
MULTI-SCALAR GOVERNANCE LENS TO ELUCIDATE POTENTIAL FOR ‘TRANSFORMATION’ (Abstract ID: 28251 | Poster ID: 557)
Water security is one of the most pressing development challenges of the Anthropocene, epitomized by the recent adoption of a dedicated water goal in the post-2015
development agenda. This agenda aims to ‘transform our world’. Fundamental to
such a transformation are water governance reforms. Indeed, many researchers and
water management practitioners have called for a paradigm shift away from top-down
command and control management towards adaptive water governance in order to
enable transformation. Yet there has been limited research into the potential for such
transformations in SIDS— contexts, which we argue are peculiar, and deserving of
special attention. To address this gap, this paper utilizes a multi-scalar governance lens
to interrogate water sector reforms in Samoa (the Pacific) and St. Lucia (the Caribbean).
The multi-scalar governance lens elucidated how the actually existing complex water
governance systems have arisen over time, through processes of contestation and
struggle between actors at multiples scales, to fit the specific geophysical, political and
cultural contexts in two case studies. The results also illustrate how, even in the unique
socio-political contexts in SIDS, where state-society relations are often blurred, formal
hierarchies are sometimes ill-defined, and informal relations between actors can act as
limitations, there exist immanent opportunities for transformative change towards more
adaptive and socially-just governance.

Yellowtail (Seriola lalandi) are large, carangid, meso-predators that migrate between
sub-tropical and temperate reef systems along the North American west coast. They
are seasonally abundant, corresponding to regionally elevated sea-surface temperatures;
increased catches occur during periods of warm water or ENSO conditions. However,
analysis of recreational catch data suggests the largest (>13 kg) individuals inhabit nearshore waters year-round. These observations suggest a structured pattern of space-use
based upon physiological constraints and ontogenetic movements, with the potential
for novel northward range expansions under conditions of ocean warming. This work is
the first since 1960 on this widely targeted, economically important species. To examine
spatial and temporal trends in the fishery, all recreational catch in southern California between 1936-2015 from all existing databases were analyzed by size, season, location, and
sea-surface temperature. Catch was bi-modal with peaks at both immature and mature
sizes, larger fish were caught inshore (<3 mi) while smaller fish were predominantly offshore (>3 mi). These trends varied predictably depending on season. Fish caught during
winter were significantly larger than those caught during the remainder of the year. These
trends motivated a comprehensive regional tagging program. Currently, the recapture rate
is 21%, with time at liberty ranging from 24 hours to 24 months and recapture distance
from 0-400km and suggests novel evidence of ontogenetic changes in movement.


IMPROVING LONG-TERM CORAL REEF MONITORING IN THE WIDER CARIBBEAN
REGION: INITIAL GCRMN-CARIBBEAN ACCOMPLISHMENTS (Abstract ID: 28385)


Long-term and robust coral reef monitoring coupled with strategic reporting are essential drivers for ecosystem-based management and regional policy processes. The Global
Coral Reef Monitoring Network (GCRMN) reportStatus and Trends of Caribbean Coral
Reefs 1970-2012 highlighted the limitations of regional coral reef monitoring in the Caribbean. To address the urgent need for more effective coral reef monitoring and reporting
The foundation for restructuring the network was launched in August 2014, along with
concrete proposals for improvements in data collection, archiving and communication.
Several technical and scientific solutions have been proposed to address the lack of
information and dissemination, and inconsistency in applying monitoring methods and
approaches throughout the region. The first two years of the GCRMN-Caribbean has
seen the confirmation of a dynamic network, which has been bolstering its presence
and regional acknowledgement. An expert steering committee and members-at-large
have enabled the network to achieve substantial progress. GCRMN-Caribbean integrated
guidelines have been improved and tested at several sites; communication and experience sharing have increased considerably; capacity building actions have been identified
and developed; and there has been collaboration with major Caribbean programmes.
This paper reports on the progress towards revitalizing the GCRMN-Caribbean, its initial
achievements, as well as network challenges and next steps.

GLOBAL PATTERNS OF FUNCTIONAL RARITY IN REEF FISH COMMUNITIES
(Abstract ID: 29630)
The loss of biodiversity caused by human-mediated impacts has reached unprecedented
level across all ecosystems, with rare species being by far the most threatened. Despite
the importance of biodiversity to sustain ecological processes, little is known about the
particular functions supported by rare species or the functional vulnerability of communities to rare species loss. Thus, assessing the spatial distribution of functional rarity
would provide relevant information to the conservation of the most vulnerable species
and communities within the context of intense disturbances and high uncertainty. Our
extensive dataset comprised local abundances, regional occupancies and functional
traits for 1,474 reef fish species. We assessed global patterns of functional rarity and
implemented scenarios of functional diversity loss across 93 reef fish communities distributed across five marine biogeographic regions. We found that rare species fulfil much
of the range of functional traits within reef fish communities and often perform unique
roles. We identified high functional diversity erosion from rare species loss in the majority of reef fish communities, this level reaching up to 70% of functional diversity in one
location. Also, rare species carry the most distinct combinations of functional traits (high
distinctiveness), whereas species with low functional distinctiveness are either locally
rare or common. Our results highlight the vulnerability of ecological roles supported by
rare species, even in highly diverse reef fish communities.


EFFECTIVE DISPERSAL OF CARIBBEAN REEF FISH IS SMALLER THAN CURRENT SPACING AMONG MARINE PROTECTED AREAS (Abstract ID: 29826)


Coral reefs are deteriorating at a fast pace. Conservation measures, such as Marine
Protected Areas, have been implemented to relieve some areas from local stressors and
allow populations to restore to natural levels. Successful networks of MPAs can operate
if the space among MPAs is smaller than the dispersal capacity of the species under
protection. Here we tested the power of genome-wide Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
data to estimate connectivity across populations in a series of MPAs around Puerto Rico
and contrasted with 18 microsatellite markers. We found that in the common yellowhead
Jawfish, Opistognathus aurifrons the maximum effective dispersal is 10 km. MPAs
exchange migrants likely via intermediate available unprotected habitats through stepping stone dispersal. At scales > 100 km such connectivity is decreased, after the Mona
Passage, making the Dominican Republic a genetic mosaic of the genetic variation from
the eastern and western Caribbean. The MPA network studied is unable to maintain

TEMPORAL CHANGES IN THE PRODUCTIVITY AND CALCIFICATION OF
SLOPE AND LAGOONAL BENTHIC COMMUNITIES ON A PLATFORM REEF
(Abstract ID: 29275)
More than a quarter of a century ago, pioneering studies assessing the metabolism of
coral reef communities were conducted in order to better understand the workings of

26

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Coral-reef fishes are particularly susceptible to predation during their transition from
pelagic larvae to reef-associated juveniles. Larvae of some species detect cues from
predators and avoid settling nearby. However, it is unknown whether recruits alter
their settlement habitat in response to invasive predators and how other potentially
mediating factors, including predator diet and interactions among conspecific recruits
experiments to test for non-consumptive effects of native and non-native predators on
the settlement of Caribbean coral-reef fishes. There was no effect of predator presence
or conspecific density on the recruitment of bicolor damselfish (Stegastes partitus) to
standardized patch reefs. In contrast, there were ~52% fewer mahogany snapper (Lutjanus mahagoni) recruits to reefs with a native predator (graysby grouper, Cephalopholis
cruentata) compared to predator-free control reefs and reefs with an invasive predator
(red lionfish, Pterois volitans) regardless of predator diet. These results suggest that snapper recruits may use species-specific cues to recognize native predators and are naïve to
cues from an invasive predator. However, on nights with extremely high recruit densities
there was approximately equal recruitment of snapper to all reefs regardless of predator
presence, suggesting that intraspecific interactions among recruits may limit the nonconsumptive effects of predators at high conspecific densities.

these beautiful, yet complex ecosystems. Today, studies revisiting in-situ measurements
of coral reef metabolism are still very important as (i) technology has progressed and
offers more precise measuring techniques and (ii) reef systems are changing through
anthropogenic influences. The aim of our study was to investigate the metabolism of reef
communities of 2 distinct geomorphological zones on a platform reef in the Great Barrier
Reef, Australia. The sites, one at 5m on the reef slope and the other inside the lagoon,
were continuously monitored for water depth, temperature, oxygen, light, CO2, pH, turbidity, salinity and chlorophyll concentration using CTDs. Four times a year, in every season,
in-situ incubations were conducted at both sites using computer controlled Perspex
chambers connected to an autosampler. Importantly, two sides of the chambers opened
between incubations to allow for water exchange and prevent depletion of nutrients/
ions. Productivity, measured as oxygen flux, and calcification rates were established for
representative benthic communities inside these chambers. Preliminary results suggest
that there is a temporal effect on reef productivity and calcification. The findings of these
incubations will also be discussed in light of the background water quality measurements.


PROGRESS TOWARD ACHIEVING SETTLEMENT AND METAMORPHOSIS OF
AIPTASIA LARVAE IN THE LABORATORY (Abstract ID: 28961 | Poster ID: 200)

MODEL FOR SUSTAINABLE HARVEST TO ASSIST COMMUNITY-BASED RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 29698)

As the sea anemone Aiptasia gains traction as a model for investigating cnidariandinoflagellate symbiosis, a remaining obstacle is the inability to reproduce the complete
sexual life cycle in the laboratory. Although we can obtain regular spawning and larvae
production in the lab, the physical and/or chemical cues required for larval settlement
and metamorphosis remain elusive. Here we report progress on two fronts: (1) identification of inductive natural products and/or bacterial isolates; (2) identification and
application of neuropeptides with a role in metamorphosis. Tetrabromopyrrole, a natural
product from the marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas spp. that induces settlement
and metamorphosis in coral larvae, and a Hydra neuropeptide (Hym248) each induce
partial metamorphosis of Aiptasia without settlement. We are currently attempting to
identify bacteria or extracts that will reliably induce both settlement and metamorphosis. To identify Aiptasia LWamide neuropeptides that might induce settlement and/or
metamorphosis, we performed a thorough screen of the Aiptasia genome and available
transcriptomes. At least seven putative LWamide-like neuropeptides occur in the
genome and are also found in adult or larval transcriptomes. Four of these contain the
Metamorphosin A from Anthopleura); three others, including one expressed exclusively
in Aiptasia larvae, contain repetitive “GIW”, “GVW” or “GFW” motifs. We are currently
testing the possible roles of these neuropeptides in metamorphosis.

Fisheries worldwide are in decline due to exploitation, anthropogenic pressures, habitat
loss, and changes in climate. Here, we present a single-species assessment model
that uses resource monitoring data collected by the ‘Opihi Partnership, which involves
communities, scientists, NGO, and GO, to evaluate the ability to sustainably harvest
‘opihi (Cellana spp., limpets) at different times and locations. ‘Opihi are culturally and economically valuable to the Hawaiian Islands and its people, so it is imperative to ensure
that this fishery is sustainable. The life history characteristics of ‘opihi are used to build
assumptions into the model regarding spawning characteristics, growth rates, and size at
reproductive maturity. The model accepts ‘opihi size distribution and population density
data and returns a recommendation of whether harvest, under current legal regulations,
would be offset by the maturation of juvenile ‘opihi. We then tested the model with data
from ‘opihi makaiauli (Cellana exarata) from two islands, Mokupāpapa and Mokumanamana, in the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument (PMNM), which are
ideal because neither is subject to harvesting. The model predicts that when challenged
with unrestricted harvest within the legal size limits, the recruitment-limited site could
not sustain harvest and the recruitment-saturated site can only sustain seasonal harvest.
There is also the potential for this model to extend to other broadcast spawners such as
sea urchins, mussels, abalone, clams, and oysters.



MARINE CONSERVATION & RESOURCE MANAGEMENT YOUTH EDUCATION
- A MISSING STRATEGY IN FUTURE CORAL REEF RESILIENCE IN THE CORAL
TRIANGLE? (Abstract ID: 27856)
In 1997, in a local high school in the West New Britain Province of Papua New Guinea,
a volunteer biology sciences teacher commenced the development of the Marine
University, Australia and experienced educators, the program now reaches elementary,
primary and high schools, both locally and on a wider national scale. The principal aim
of the program is to help educate the country’s youth in marine conservation and resource management. The course compliments PNG Department of Education primary
& secondary curricula in biology and environmental sciences while exposing students
to actual field visits to coral reefs and other marine ecosystems. MEEP has now been
thoroughly field tested within Coral Triangle conditions, marine environments and communities, and is further evolving even after a period of 19 years. With this background
and historical development, is there a more co-ordinated approach for marine conservation and resource management youth education within the Coral Triangle by all CT
countries? Can MEEP be part of a solution to coral reef resilience? The future of marine
resource management within this region will depend in part on the present and future
youth generations and their understanding of sustainable use of their marine resources.
Is it time for more Coral Triangle countries to engage in this strategy for future resilience
of coral reefs? Mahonia Na Dari Research and Conservation Centre (Guardian of the
Sea), Kimbe Bay, PNG where the program is based, believes it is.

CHANGE DETECTION IN A CORAL REEF ENVIRONMENT IN THE ARABIAN
GULF USING MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING (Abstract ID: 28583)
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) borders the Arabian Gulf. The coasts and islands that
flank Abu Dhabi, the UAE’s largest emirate, host important marine habitats such as coral
reefs. These reefs are subject to pressures from urban and industrial encroachment and
from climate change. The current study aims to detect the change in a reef environment
of Dalma Island, located 42 km off Abu Dhabi, between 2013 and 2015. Satellite remote
sensing-based monitoring of such ecosystem presents a challenge due to the attenuation
of light through the atmosphere and the water column, as well as the spectral similarity of
its benthic components. Our method proposes a combination of different remote sensing
techniques that include image segmentation, non-linear feature analysis (kernel feature extraction) and ensemble learning methods (Random Forest); consisting of spectral-spatial
methods vs. pixel-based methods. Change detection is fulfilled using the Iteratively Reweighted Multivariate Alteration Detection method that performs an automatic radiometric normalization and factors out the side effects of varying acquisition conditions. The
achievement of the adaptation of these methods to the region of concern demonstrates
the operational role of multispectral remote sensing in coral reef monitoring.


NON-CONSUMPTIVE EFFECTS OF NATIVE AND INVASIVE PREDATORS ON
RECRUITMENT OF CORAL-REEF FISHES (Abstract ID: 28838)

27

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


results indicate a rising trend of recreational fisher non-compliance that could threaten
the efficacy of one of the world’s best-managed marine protected areas.

THE EFFECT OF FLUORESCENT PIGMENTS DIVERSITY ON UV INDUCED
DAMAGES IN HERMATYPIC CORALS (Abstract ID: 28654)
Solar radiation includes both vital photosynthetic active radiation (PAR), and harmful
ultra-violet radiation (UVR). Corals at the photic zone are exposed to UVR that induces
different physiological damages including two abundant DNA lesions: cyclobutane
pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and 6-4 photoproducts (6–4PPs). Such DNA damage may
lead to cell death and coral degradation. Coral reefs are known to poses a variety of
fluorescent proteins (FPs), which are extensively used as visual markers in biomedical
research, yet, their biological function is still poorly understood. Whereas it has been
shown that FP production is influenced by light and, therefore, provides photoprotection
against radiation (whether UVR or PAR), the role of fluorescence in preventing direct
DNA damage has not yet been studied. In this study, different natural fluorescent morphs
of the same coral species, coupled with translocation experiments and observations
both in-situ and ex-situ were used in order to investigate the changes in coral fluorescence and UVR protection abilities. We characterized excitation and emission spectra of
different FPs, quantified fluorescence levels, and analyzed UVR induced DNA damage in
both host and algal symbiont. We found that the expression of fluorescence can change
under different light regimes (either by photoconversion or expression levels) and that
UVR induced DNA damage varies in relation to the coral’s FP arsenal, thus, suggesting
that a certain FP might give an advantage is UVR exposed environments.

POSITIVE SELECTION AND DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION SUPPORT ECOLOGICAL SPECIATION BETWEEN THREE SYMPATRIC SPECIES OF GRUNTS
(GENUS: HAEMULON) (Abstract ID: 28717)
Understanding the genomic basis of adaptation is essential for discerning how
divergence takes place. This is particularly relevant for groups conformed by sympatric
species that have broad geographic ranges. This is the case of the genus Haemulon,
where five species pairs overlap in the Tropical Western Atlantic. Here we studied
orthologs under strong positive selection, while gene expression assays identified 1258
differentially expressed genes between the three species. Moreover, 43 genes were found
to be both under positive selection and differentially expressed. Major differences were
found in genes related with signal transduction, metabolic pathways, gene regulation and
reproductive traits. Positive selection was also found in the FGF1 gene, which is related
with the development of the feeding apparatus in fishes. Considering that overlapping
species of grunts are known to have dietary partitions, and that these correlate with
differences in feeding structures, this study supports the case for ecological speciation in
the genus Haemulon.


SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL VARIATION IN NEAR-SHORE MARINE ASSEMBLAGES AROUND THE US VIRGIN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29392 | Poster ID: 315)


While many Caribbean marine habitats have degraded in recent decades due to
Diadema outbreaks, excess nutrients, coral bleaching, overfishing etc., most attention
has been given to larger off-shore reef habitats. However, coastal near-shore marginal
habitats interspersed with corals can support high biodiversity including juveniles of
many coral-reef species. These habitats are especially prone to human-caused degradation and often are the ones most visited by tourist and arguably are an equally important
tourism asset and potential nursery. We report here on a study conducted in 2003/4
and followed up in 2013 on the benthic habitat cover at sites adjacent to St. John and
St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands. With the help of Earthwatch volunteers, we enumerated
rocky habitat cover types and distribution and size of benthic fishes and how this related
to changes in coral and other live cover. Overall coral cover declined at all sites between
palmataand Millepora spp.). Some fish species abundances seem to be tightly linked to
changes in coral cover (for instance the three-spot damselfish Stegastes planifrons seemed
briefly touch on the costs and benefits of citizen science data acquisition and among site
and across-decade trends in the above benthic characteristics.

SPATIO-TEMPORAL CHANGES OF THE REEF COMPLEX OF PROVIDENCE
ISLAND, COLOMBIAN CARIBBEAN: AN ASSESSMENT FROM THE SEASCAPE
PERSPECTIVE (Abstract ID: 28117)
Changes in coral reefs composition, richness, and distribution are not easy to quantify in
most reef systems. This is the case of the reef complex of Providence Island because
the limited spatial and temporal coverage of the traditional monitoring programs do
not allow observing changes at seascape level. We assessed those seascape units (SU)
changes within this shallow reef complex by comparing two satellite images: Ikonos
(2000) and Quickbird (2012). The SU were classified by an object oriented method,
and validated using field points. We found that 90% of the SU became fragmented or
transformed after 12 years, mainly in the west. The SU composition changed due to
macroalgae and cyanobacteria dominance and the local extinction of corals. This led to
an increase in SU richness, but with time spatial homogeneity will prevail. A decrease in
the extension of the SU dominated by corals was evident: two SU with live coral cover
>30% disappeared due to the death of Acropora and the increase of cyanobacteria. To
the east and south, the SU were fragmented and transformed to other SU that had more
macroalgae than calcifying organisms. These shifts led to a loss of 10.4% of coral reef
area and 37.7% of live coral (3.2% annual mortality rate). The results show that the reef
complex has deteriorated, losing its calcifying potential due to the replacement of live
coral by macroalgae, cyanobacteria and dead coral. This will lead to a decrease in coral
accretion, biodiversity and ecosystem services. Satellite analysis gives us a better tool to
understand the magnitude of reef changes.



PREVALENCE OF POACHING BY RECREATIONAL FISHERS IN THE GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE PARK, AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 27795)

GENOMIC SIGNATURES OF PRE-ADAPTATION AND POST-INVASION RAPID
ADAPTIVE EVOLUTION IN THE BLUESPOTTED CORNETFISH, A MEDITERRANEAN LESSEPSIAN INVADER (Abstract ID: 29913)

Though the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park is widely considered the best managed coral
reef in the world, law enforcement records show a rapidly increasing trend in detected
offences and non-compliance by recreational fishers. However, the actual level of illegal
a mixed methods approach. Specifically, we surveyed 265 fishermen and conducted 60
underwater visual censuses to quantify discarded fishing gear inside and outside no-fishing zones. Our study revealed three key results: 1) the level of non-compliance among
fishers is between 3 and 18%; 2) poaching activities were often concentrated in poaching
hotspots; and 3) the highest rated perceived motivations to poach were because fishing
is better in no-take zones, and a low probability of detection. Thus, efforts to reduce
fishermen that green zones work) are unlikely to reduce poaching activities. Overall, our

Biological invasions are increasingly creating ecological and economical disasters both
on land and in aquatic environments. For over a century, the Mediterranean Sea has
steadily been invaded by Red Sea species (called Lessepsian invaders) via the Suez
Canal, with a current estimate of approximately 450 species. The bluespotted cornetfish,
Fistularia commersonii, considered a “Lessepsian sprinter”, entered the Mediterranean
in 2000, and by 2005 had invaded the entire basin from Israel to Spain. The situation is
unique and interesting both because of its unprecedented rapidity, and by the fact that it
took this species approximately 130 years to migrate from the Red Sea into the Mediterranean. Using genome scans, with restriction site associated DNA (RAD) sequencing, we
evaluated neutral and selected genomic regions for Mediterranean vs. Red Sea cornetfish individuals. We found that little neutral changes were detectable among populations.

28

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

However, almost half of the genes associated with the 47 loci under selection were
related to disease resistance and osmoregulation. Due to the short time elapsed from the
beginning of the invasion to our sampling, we interpret these changes as signatures of
pre-adaptation, where Red Sea individuals that carried those traits were primed to successfully invade the Mediterranean. Such genomic regions are therefore good candidates
