

FISH SPAWNING AGGREGATIONS MODIFY MULTI-SPECIES AND -TROPHIC
INTERACTIONS (Abstract ID: 28960)
The vast majority of fish spawning aggregation (FSA) research has focussed on the
identification, characterisation and monitoring of the focal spawning species. This is
understandable given their imperilled status. However, little attention has been paid to
the effects FSAs have on resident fish and benthic assemblages, which may be particularly evident during large predatory fish aggregations. Here we use repeated underwater
visual surveys and behavioural observations to assess how resident fish and benthic assemblages respond to the natural variation in predator biomass found at a multi-species
grouper FSA site in Palau, Micronesia. We found strong risk effects of grouper presence
resulting in changes in overall fish assemblage, and decreased excursion areas and bite
rates in the ubiquitous surgeonfish, Ctenochaetus striatus. Concurrent increases in turf
algal biomass suggest indirect behaviourally mediated effects occur across multiple
trophic levels. Such species interactions can be a primary force in structuring communities and food webs, highlighting the wider importance of FSA sites at a time when FSAs
worldwide are in decline.


PLANNING AND MANAGING MARINE PROTECTED AREAS: FROM BELIEF
SYSTEMS TO EVIDENCE (Abstract ID: 29115)
People involved in establishing and managing marine protected areas (MPAs) are
motivated by wanting to make a positive difference to the eventual state of the marine
environment. In parallel with medicine, education, and development aid, the difference
we make in conservation is referred to as “impact”. Impact can be evaluated retrospectively, to offer lessons to planners and managers, and estimated predictively, to guide
decisions on priorities for conservation investments. But much of the decision-making
around MPAs is based more on untested belief systems than on evidence. Effective
MPAs require decision-makers to critically assess their assumptions and beliefs about
approaches to planning and management. This presentation critiques five aspects
of decision-making about MPAs, showing that none of them can be linked reliably
to conservation impact: 1. Accumulating km2 2. Establishing large, remote MPAs 3.
KBAs, EBSAs) 5. Systematic methods to represent species or marine bioregions. All
five approaches fail to inform funders and decision-makers about conservation impact
and risk being used to over-state progress in marine conservation. A consequence is
avoidable degradation of marine ecosystems and loss of marine biodiversity. The barrier
to moving to evidence-based decisions for MPAs is not lack of capacity, but lack of
willingness to use and refine available tools to look critically at and improve approaches
to decision-making about MPAs.


COMPOUNDING EFFECTS OF CONTAMINATED GROUNDWATER ON CORAL
REEF BIOEROSION AND HEALTH (Abstract ID: 28183)
Increased CO2 concentrations from greenhouse gases have been linked to a lowering
of surface seawater pH by 0.1 and aragonite saturation state (Ω) by 15%. Global climate
models predict an additional change of 0.3 pH units by 2100, triggering a decrease in Ω
5x greater than natural variability over the last millennium. Managing local stressors that
exacerbate vulnerability of coral reefs to climate change is therefore of paramount importance. Land-based sources of pollution that alter coastal water nutrient and pH levels
can magnify vulnerability to CO2-related impacts, with nutrients and pH acting together
to accelerate bioerosion rates. We examine coral reef health, indicated by bioerosion,
calcification, and growth rate, in response to multiple stressors from high-nutrient, lowpH submarine groundwater discharge in West Maui. Freshwater discharging directly from
groundwater vents off of Kahekili Beach Park in West Maui contains elevated nutrient
concentrations and lower pH values than surrounding waters. The range of conditions
that corals living in the vicinity of the vents are exposed to is comparable to those arising
from end-of-century pCO2 projections, however measured bioerosion rates at Kahekili
are greater than those predicted from previous relationships between Ω and bioerosion. Elevated nearshore nitrate and coral tissue δ15N values distinctly reflect the down
stream signature of nutrient loading from wastewater effluent injected into the coastal
aquifer ~300 m upland of the reef. These results suggest nutrient loading from human


273

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

center of analysis. In Pacific Island communities, seascapes are particularly important
given that the ocean (1) contributes considerably to the well-being of coastal communities, (2) is an area of high overlap between tourists and residents, and (3) are threatened
as our climate continues to change and human pressures are increasing. We will discuss
various methods we use to understand seascapes including observation notebooks,
interviews, surveys, focus groups, participatory mapping, discourse analysis, and integration of weather, oceanographic, and population data. Seascape maps and results will
be presented for a small coastal community of Hilo, Hawaii as an example of these
approaches. By interviewing respected ocean observers we are learning more about
changes they have witnessed over time and the spatial scales and ocean conditions
important to them. Managing complex seascapes requires the integration of both human
and mechanical observations to ensure that multiple systems of knowledge are included
and valued; strengthening our understanding of seascapes and their resiliency in this
changing environment.

activity is driving a disproportionate escalation of bioerosion rates under low pH/ocean
acidification conditions.
French Polynesia
Polynesia
Polynesia

USE OF SEXUAL REPRODUCTION TO ACCLIMATIZE EARLY LIFE STAGES
OF CORALS TO CLIMATE CHANGE: WHAT DOES NOT KILL ME, MAKES ME
STRONGER? (Abstract ID: 29780)


Restoration in coral reefs involves the use of both reproduction patterns of corals
importance to ensure high genetic diversity. Transgenerational acclimatization was
achieved in corals, but there is almost no information about whether intra-generational
effects may also occur. In our work, we hypothesize that early life stages of corals may
be preconditioned to thermal stress, meaning that a first exposure to short-term thermal
stress may render them more resistant to a second exposure at a later stage. To achieve
was performed. Our results show that 1h of preconditioning improves the successful
fertilization rate of gametes, by a 57.6% increase in fertilization rate. Moreover, both age of
the larvae and timing of preconditioning matter in order to acclimate larvae to sub-lethal
temperatures. Indeed, non-swimming larvae (2 days old) showed a better capacity to
acclimatize to thermal stress than 6 to 10 day old larvae. In conclusion, our results are
promising, and revealed that intra-generational acclimatization may occur in Acropora.
This has the potential to 1) enhance current restoration efforts of coral reefs by transplanting recruits or larvae with better resistance and 2) improve our knowledge of acclimatization and adaptation processes among key organisms, such as scleractinian corals.

A ROBUST METHOD FOR PREDICTING WHERE TROPICAL CYCLONES DAMAGE REEFS (Abstract ID: 29174)
Tropical cyclones (TC) waves can severely damage coral reefs. Models that predict
where such damage occurred (the ‘damage zone’) enable reef managers to: 1) target
management responses after major TCs in near-real time to promote recovery at
severely damaged sites; and 2) identify spatial patterns in historic TC exposure to help
explain habitat condition trajectories. To provide these capabilities, damage models must
be valid for a wide range of TCs, which vary in intensity, circulation size and duration.
Here, we map damage zones for 46 TCs that crossed Australia’s Great Barrier Reef
from 1985-2015 using four models – three from the literature and one we develop to
extend the capability of the others. We ground truth model performance with field data
of damage from seven TCs of varying characteristics. The model we develop, 4MW,
significantly out-performs the other models at accurately capturing damage. The next
best performing model – AHF - under-predicted damage for the large and/or long-lived
TCs which are most likely to cause widespread damage, and over-predicted damage
for short-lived TCs. These two models produce strikingly different spatial and temporal
patterns of damage frequency when examining historic patterns in TC damage exposure
over the 30-year time series. We conclude that the 4MW model greatly enhances both
of the main capabilities TC damage models provide to managers. The 4MW model can
be used wherever both TCs and corals occur, such as in parts of SE Asia where reefs
frequently experience the largest and most intense TCs in the world.


SIGANUS VIRGATUS IS A KEY BROWSER IN CORAL REEFS OF THE GULF OF
THAILAND (Abstract ID: 28481 | Poster ID: 582)


Browsing fish species are important functional players in coral reefs because of their
ability to remove macroalgae. Their identification thus has important implications for
future management strategies aimed at increasing the resilience of coral reefs. However,
very few studies have been conducted outside of the Great Barrier Reef in Australia.
This study aimed to identify important browsers at two study sites in the Gulf of Thailand: Mae Haad, a heavily touristic and fished bay dominated by algae and the Marine
Park Ang Thong, dominated by hard corals and exhibiting very low algae cover. Findings
revealed that more than 90 % of size-adjusted bites taken from macroalgae assays
derived from only one species, Siganus virgatus, which dominated feeding in both reefs.
Higher size-adjusted bite rate in Ang Thong (11.2 ± 18.4 msb h-1 vs. 0.7 ± 2.3 msb h-1
biomass removal on overnight assays (53 ± 44 % removed compared to 4 ± 8 % in Mae
Haad). No Acanthurids were observed in either reef. As reefs without Acanthurids often
undergo phase shifts, the healthy state of Ang Thong is remarkable. The data suggest a
key role of Siganus virgatus for macroalgal removal on coral reefs in the Gulf of Thailand. In the absence of the usual important Acanthurid browsing species such as Naso
spp., Siganus virgatus assumed the role as dominant macroalgae remover and should
thus be considered more extensively in management and conservation efforts.

MULTI-FACTOR VARIATION IN ARTISANAL SEA CUCUMBER FISHERIES IN
OCEANIA (Abstract ID: 30149)
Small-scale fisheries on coral reefs are important to livelihoods of millions of fishers,
yet catches, gender participation and livelihood options are often poorly understood.
We characterised fishing and fishers in multi-species sea cucumber fisheries using
questionnaire-based surveys in multiple regions within each of four countries in Oceania.
Many women were fishing sea cucumbers in Fiji, Tonga and New Caledonia, whereas
women in Kiribati mostly participated in postharvest processing. Catch-per-unit-effort
(CPUE) differed among countries depending on fishing modes and species targeted.
Fishers tended to view stocks as declining or greatly over-exploited. In many cases,
women received much lower prices than men for their catch. Sea cucumbers were often
a primary source of income for fishers, and a majority of them rely on other coastal
resources as fall-back income streams. This study shows that fishers and their catches
in artisanal reef fisheries can be highly context-dependent. Understanding species
composition and catch rates of fishers through sociological surveys will support better
fishery management. Management measures and interventions to support fisher livelihoods must consider gender differences and location-specific fishing activities. Our study
indicates that closure of certain reef fisheries will likely cause greater pressure on other
fisheries unless livelihood diversification programs are developed.


SEASCAPE IDENTITIES; UNDERSTANDING VALUES AND CULTURAL PATTERNS
(Abstract ID: 29278)
Seascapes symbolize both the physical dimensions of ocean and coastal areas, as well
as the meanings humans ascribe to their observations, interactions, and relationships to
the sea. Seascapes have value and contribute to building identities and understanding
territories. More than beautiful scenery over the ocean, a seascape is a fluid cultural
and geographic space, whose dynamics make it complex to define but should be at the


274

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

LONG-TERM CHANGES AND RESTORATION MEASURES OF SOFT CORALS


REVERSING THE DECLINE OF SHARK POPULATIONS IN RAJA AMPAT, EASTERN INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 28500)

Soft corals, Dendronephthya spp., are members of 19 genera (in four families) of soft
corals found in Thai waters. In the Andaman Sea, Dendronephthyaspp. is dominant at
several coral reefs. Their beauty and color attract divers to these reefs making them
popular diving destinations. In this study, we investigate the long-term changes of the
soft corals, Dendronephthya spp., from 2009 – 2013 in three study sites of the Mu Ko
Similan National Park, one of the most frequented diving destinations in the Andaman
Sea. We found that the average percent covers of Dendronephthya spp. spp. were significantly different among the study sites. The highest coverage ofDendronephthya spp. was
observed at West of Eden while the lowest one was recorded at Ao Faiwab. Significant
temporal variation was also detected among years. Reduction in soft coral bottom cover
as influenced by certain environmental factors and rapid growth of tourism. The number
of tourists visiting Mu Ko Similan in 2013 was nearly doubled compared to that in 2011.
Based on our analysis, controlling tourism impacts on soft corals could be possible by
implementing the following measures: 1) setting appropriate management action plan
with the implementation of effective enforcement and regulation of diving activities; 2)
establishing zoning and their appropriate carrying capacity for tourists in certain areas
and 3) enhancing research and techniques on soft coral restoration.

The high marine biodiversity and natural beauty of Raja Ampat, Indonesia attracts not
only dive tourism but also outside fishers, who often engage in destructive and illegal fishing, including the targeting of sharks for their economically valuable fins. Since 2009, Raja
Ampat local government made several efforts to improve shark conservation, including:
media campaign; develop surveillance system that includes monitoring shark fishermen
activities; and develop prohibit shark fishing regulation. The declaration of 4,6 million
hectares marine areas as a Raja Ampat shark sanctuary in December 2012 was the first
of its kind for Indonesia and for the Coral Triangle. Since the declaration of the shark
sanctuary, the Indonesian government has been supporting the enforcement of the shark
finning ban, with several illegal fishers being caught and prosecuted. Shark populations
have been surveyed approximately annually from 2009 to 2015 as part of routine reef fish
monitoring. Preliminary results indicate shark populations inside MPAs have increased
five-fold after three years the sanctuary was implemented. Whereas outside MPAs, shark
populations are increased two-fold. This is further reinforced by anecdotal evidence from
local patrol team observations on the reappearance of juvenile shark populations in
several areas. Amidst an overall trend of shark population decline in Indonesia, this shark
sanctuary is showing a promising outlook for the recovery of shark populations in Raja
Ampat, providing a model for other regions in the Coral Triangle and beyond.



THE HABITAT PERSISTENCE HYPOTHESIS: A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON THE
DISTRIBUTION OF CORAL-REEF ORGANISMS (Abstract ID: 29098)

A ROLE FOR INDUCIBLE DNA METHYLATION IN CORAL INTRA- AND CROSSGENERATIONAL ACCLIMATIZATION TO FUTURE OCEAN CONDITIONS
(Abstract ID: 28934)

We propose the “Habitat Persistence Hypothesis” (HPH) to explain patterns of diversity
on tropical coral-reefs. We reviewed distributions of organisms inhabiting tropical coral
reefs, and formulated the HPH to account for biogeographical patterns on both shallow
(<30m) and deep (30–150m) coral-reef habitats. Species occurring on deep reefs appear
to show higher rates of endemism and less eastward diversity attenuation than their
counterparts on shallow reefs. The HPH stipulates that shallow-reef habitats persist
persist in all regions. The HPH suggests that habitat persistence results in higher rates of
endemism, and that patterns of attenuating diversity with distance from centers of species richness reflect recolonization from areas with shallow-habitat persistence. Whereas
existing hypotheses that attempt to explain biogeographic patterns rely on observations limited to shallow (<30m) coral-reef habitat and invoke processes operating on
speciation time-scales (~10^7 yr), the HPH also incorporates patterns on the remaining
80% of coral-reef habitat (30–150m), and invokes processes operating on time scales
associated with sea-level changes (~10^5 yr). The HPH posits seven specific predictions
that can be directly tested to distinguish its role from existing coral-reef biogeographic
hypotheses.

As climate change intensifies and the pace of warming and ocean acidification increases,
reef-building corals must acclimatize to persist. One mechanism of intra- and crossgenerational acclimatization (IGA, CGA) is inducible DNA methylation and its associated
phenotypic plasticity. In a series of experiments we have identified 1) CGA of Pocillopora
damicornis larval metabolism to high temperature and low pH, 2) beneficial parental effects
induced upon exposure to low pH, together supporting a role for acclimatization through
damicornis adults and offspring after exposure to ambient (~27 °C) and future temperatures
(~29 °C). Adults and offspring were collected prior to exposure and after larval release at 1,
2, and 3 months for comparison of DNA methylation and gene expression patterns. Thermal performance curves of larval respiration and survivorship across 5 temperatures (26-34
°C) suggest a shift to higher thermal tolerance in offspring whose parents were exposed to
higher temperature. Together with ongoing RNAseq and reduced representation bisulfite
sequencing data, these results indicate a strong role for dynamic DNA methylation in rapid
CGA with implications for coral performance in a future of climate change.


CORALLINE ALGAE DISEASE REDUCES SURVIVAL AND SETTLEMENT SUCCESS OF CORAL PLANULAE IN LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS (Abstract ID:
28836)


MARINE CONSERVATION MANAGEMENT OF KRAKATAU ISLANDS, INDONESIA
(Abstract ID: 27897 | Poster ID: 568)

Coral reef diseases have increased in frequency and severity, spread worldwide and
threaten to worsen with changing environmental conditions. Disease outbreaks have
been involved in the deterioration of coral reefs and have been particularly striking
among crustose coralline algae (CCA). Although CCA represent important cues for coral
settlement, the impact of CCA diseases on the survival and settlement of coral planulae
is unknown. Exposing coral larvae to healthy, diseased, and recently dead crusts from
three important CCA species, we show a negative effect of disease in the inductive CCA
species Hydrolithon boergesenii on larval survivorship ofOrbicella faveolata and settlement
the less inductive CCA species Neogoniolithon mamillare and Paragoniolithon accretum.
were on healthy rather than diseased/dying tissue. Our experiments suggest that CCA
diseases have the potential to reduce the survivorship and settlement of coral planulae
on coral reefs. Exacerbated under climate change conditions, the impacts of diseases on
CCA could potentially hamper the resilience of coral reefs. This study aids understanding of disease cascading effects on reef communities.

The Krakatau Islands form a group of isolated, uninhabited, but accessible volcanic
islands in the Sunda Strait between Sumatra and Java (Indonesia Archipelago). Their
geological growth and development are well documented. Based on an Indonesian
Government decision, the Krakatau complex was designated as a Natural Reserve,
consisting of Marine Reserves and Nature (land) Reserve. The present report provide
suggestions concerning their marine conservation management in relation to natural and
anthropogenic disturbances. The result showed the ongoing impact of the anthropogenic
will continue to lead to degradation in the future unless the utilization of the area will
become more controlled.

275

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


ance management undertaken by the Australian and Queensland State governments’
joint Field Management Program. This compliance program is risk-based and involves
assessing the impact of illegal activities and the likelihood of them occurring. This is
used to focus the compliance programs core functions of intelligence, surveillance and
investigations on those activities of the highest impact and risk. To ensure effective
compliance with relevant legislation the program is coordinated by a central compliance unit that works with and coordinates the efforts of the multiple Australian and
Queensland government agencies that participate in the compliance management of
the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area. The approach to compliance management
consists of education, aerial surveillance, vessel patrolling, remote surveillance and
audits of activities that require a formal permission. The aim is to achieve high levels of
voluntary compliance and use enforcement where warranted. Increasingly the program
is incorporating technological enhancements and new administrative measures to tackle
recidivist behaviour where traditional approaches may be limited. It is the combination
of a strategic risk-based program and incorporating new tools that enables the compliance program to be flexible and tackle emerging issues to assist in protecting the values
of the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area.

VARYING LEVELS OF HERBIVORY AND NUTRIENT CONDITION MEDIATE
CORAL SETTLEMENT SUCCESS (Abstract ID: 29266)
Herbivores play an important functional role in regulating the proliferation of algae in coral
reef ecosystems. A short-term caging experiment was designed to investigate the role
of herbivorous fishes on coral settlement at three sites in Bacuit Bay, Philippines. Coral
settlement tiles were subjected to the following herbivore exclusion treatments: caged,
partially caged and no cage, set at 5 m intervals along 50-m transects. After six months, tiles
were retrieved and brought to the laboratory for microscopic analyses. To correlate spat
abundance and densities with potential reef fish herbivores, underwater fish visual census
was undertaken along the same transect. Water samples were collected at 1 m depth and 1
m above the reef at 15 m intervals along transects to measure nutrients. Preliminary results
reveal that mean coral settlement rate was highest at Tres Marias (4.3 ± 0.7) followed by
Depeldet (3.2 ± 0.6) and South Miniloc (0.8 ± 0.3). Experimental treatments that were open
to herbivore grazing resulted in higher rates of coral settlement at Tres Marias and Depeldet,
because herbivores mediated coral-algal competition. However, at South Miniloc, the
herbivore exclusion treatments resulted in the highest numbers of coral settlers, which seem
to suggest that incidental predation by herbivores reduced coral settlement in the partial and
open treatments. There was no significant difference in phosphate and nitrate concentrations across sites, however, ammonium concentration was two-fold higher in Depeldet
compared to South Miniloc which could favor algal growth.



EFFECTS OF INORGANIC NUTRIENTS ON CORAL PRODUCTION OF FLUORESCENT DISSOLVED ORGANIC MATTER (Abstract ID: 29769 | Poster ID: 93)
Photosynthetic benthic organisms in tropical reefs all exude a portion of their primary
production as dissolved organic matter. Understanding the composition and fate of this
organic matter is central to a holistic characterization of coral reef ecosystem metabolism. We experimentally examined the effect of a gradient of nitrate and phosphate
enrichment on the quantity and composition of exudates produced by corals during
a multi-week chemostat incubation. We characterized temporal shifts in the spectral
characteristics of fluorescent dissolved organic matter (fDOM) using scanning fluorescence spectroscopy and measured concentrations of dissolved organic carbon, nitrogen
and phosphorus. While bulk measures of dissolved organics remained stable across
a gradient of nutrient enrichment, fDOM exudates from corals were compositionally
distinct from ambient pools and nutrient addition altered coral-derived fDOM in specific
fluorescent regions that may indicate differential production and consumption of organic
compounds by corals under shifting inorganic nutrient regimes. Our results are relevant
to understanding coral organic exudation and the impacts of anthropogenic pollution on
reef organic matter cycling.

CATCH TRENDS IN MARINE TROPHIC GROUPS: AN EVALUATION OF SELECTED MARINE KEY BIODIVERSITY AREAS IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID:
29310 | Poster ID: 579)
Overfishing is a rampant ubiquitous phenomenon attributed to human-induced impacts.
Fisheries are often selective towards high trophic groups (TG), progressing towards
the catch trends per TG in conservation hotspots or Marine Key Biodiversity Areas
(MKBAs) is vital towards successful management and sustainability of the fisheries. This
study investigates the catch trends per TG through time in 3 selected Marine Key Biodiversity Areas in the Philippines. Moreover, a snapshot comparison in fishing gears used
in the past and present as well as overall catch per trip per gear was also determined.
Quantitative estimates of catch trends and gear history were obtained using 1 on 1
interviews with the local communities. Fish catch were grouped into 8 TG by clustering
all the sites in the past and present were composed of both high and low TG with the
latter comprising the bulk. Catch per trip for all TG initially increased during the 1950s
and 1960s. However, catch per trip has been on a gradual decline since the 1970s until
the present. Gear composition per site were similar between past and present, however,
catch per trip was higher in the past. The results indicate that fishing down the food web
is experienced in the 3 MKBAs. Management interventions such as MPA establishment,
catch quotas, close season and alternative livelihoods should be pursued to ensure
fisheries sustainability.


RESILIENCE OF THE CORAL REEFS FISH POPULATIONS ON THE PADANG
SHELF REEF SYSTEM, WEST SUMATRA, INDONESIA, AFTER THE 1997 MASSIVE CORAL DIE OFF (Abstract ID: 28173 | Poster ID: 211)
Quantitative surveys of six coral reefs of the coast West Sumatra began in the latter decade of the 20th century. Then, as many as 50% of the reefs were classified as degraded,
primarily because of blast fishing. Some of the reefs surveyed were in an area that
subsequently became the Marine Tourism Park Pieh Island. In 1997, reefs in the Padang
Shelf Reef System experienced a massive die off associated with the Indian Ocean
Dipole where an upwelling caused by unusually strong winds increased nutrient levels
wildfires in Sumatra, oceanic nutrient levels were elevated to a point where a massive
red tide event occurred and persisted for six months. Live coral cover (LLC) declined to
0% to a depth of at least 10-15m and many of the obligate coral reef fish populations
were extirpated. In 2014, nearly 17 years after the die off, the reefs were resurveyed. All
the surveyed reefs experienced increased live coral cover with some sites up to 70%

COMPLIANCE MANAGEMENT IN THE GREAT BARRIER REEF WORLD HERITAGE AREA (Abstract ID: 29198)
Protecting the world-renowned beauty and biodiversity of the Great Barrier Reef World
Heritage Area and providing a level playing field for all users are key aims of the compli-

276

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

LCC and a recovery of many of the fish populations with 28 families observed. Only
four fish families were recorded at all eight sites: Chaetodontidae, Labridae, Lutjanidae
and Pomacentridae. The most abundant family, the Pomacentridae, comprised 30.1% of
the fish recorded. Species common in 1996, but not recorded in 2014 were Heniochus
was ranked 10th in abundance in 2014. Three species with a ranking of >10 in 2014
were not recorded in 1996: Chaetodon kleinii – Rank 3, Heniochus singularius – Rank 4,
Forcipiger longirostrus – Rank 6.

VARIATIONS IN CORAL MICROBIOMES AMONG INDONESIAN REEFS WITH
DIFFERENTIAL LEVELS OF BLEACHING (Abstract ID: 29884)
In some Indonesian waters, corals have suffered mass bleaching due to increasing ocean
temperatures, especially during El Nino events. However, corals in different regions of
Indonesia appear to respond differently to this thermal stress. Corals have a flexible
relationship with their symbionts, which vary in their ability to withstand or recover
from environmental stress. In addition to Symbiodinium, corals also host other types of
symbionts, including bacteria and archaea, that might have roles in affecting the coral’s
response to elevated temperature. In order to evaluate the relationship of associated
bacteria and archaea to the coral’s response to elevated temperature and subsequent
bleaching, we conducted a temperature stress experiment on three species: Acropora
millepora, Pocillopora verrucosa, and Porites lobata, from a reef in West Papua that
experienced very mild bleaching during 2010 El Nino event followed by recovery, as
well as Porites lobata from two locations in Bali that experienced different levels of
bleaching. Following a common garden experiment in which coral fragments were
exposed to temperatures of 30oC as control, 32oC, 34oC, and 36oC, we sequenced 16S
to assay changes in microbial diversity. Deep-sequencing analyses revealed substantial
variation in microbial reefs associated with different levels of bleaching stress, with
strong host-specific microbiome profiles. Variation of microbial communities associated
with differential host responses to temperature stress indicates the potential role of the
microbiome in aiding the coral’s response to environmental stress.


MONITORING LA REUNION AND MAYOTTE CORAL REEFS (WESTERN INDIAN
OCEAN) DURING EXPECTED EL NIÑO EVENT (Abstract ID: 28706 | Poster ID:
342)
Scientists and volunteers of Reef Check France have been surveying La Reunion’s and
Mayotte’s coral reefs for 15 years. Due to the occurrence of an El Niño phenomenon, a
bleaching event took place during the austral summer 2015-2016 period in the Western
Indian Ocean. Studies during previous events (1997-1998; 2001-2002) showed that there
exist variability in extent and severity from site to site. Fortunately, the studies revealed
areas with a good resilience. Since 2005, Reef Check France has monitored 18 reef stations in Reunion Island and 7 reef stations in Mayotte Island. To monitor the 2015-2016
bleaching event, Reef Check France and partners has selected some “sentinel stations”
to implement surveys, from March to May 2016, during and right after the hottest
critical period. Coral monitoring has been completed including a temperature record.
Results will be compared with existing datasets to assess, if any, differences in hard
coral cover, including bleached coral cover, dominant coral forms, macroalgae cover,
and temperature relationships. Reef Check, operated by volunteers, use two world-wide
basic protocols to survey coral bleaching, which so can’t provide species or genera
richness comparison. Even so, it is rapidly and easily implemented during field studies
and complementary to more costly research programs. Nevertheless, here, local team
leaders (marine scientists) were able to implement a “Reef Check+ bleaching” protocol,
more accurately to report the coral genus that has been concerned. Three protocols are
thus adequate and efficient tools to rapidly assess a bleaching event and so help decision
makers in management issues.


INFLEXIBILITY OF THE MICROBIOME DRIVES HOLOBIONT BREAKDOWN
DURING EXCESS NITROGEN AVAILABILITY (Abstract ID: 28556)
The symbiosis between corals and photosynthetic algae of the genus Symbiodinium
provides the foundation to the success of corals in tropical oligotrophic waters. The
persistence of this symbiosis is facilitated by a constant nitrogen (N) limitation of the
algal partners, adjusting symbiont cell division rates to those of the coral host. Recent
studies proposed that shifts in the coral microbiome and associated microbial N-cycling
pathways may help corals to maintain this N-limitation even under eutrophic conditions.
To test this hypothesis, we aimed to release Symbiodinium populations from N limitation
in hospite by exposing colonies of Pocillopora verrucosa to excess N-enrichment in a
two-week aquaria experiment at the Central Red Sea. Strikingly, the overall structure of
bacterial and Symbiodinium communities was stable throughout the experiment, thereby
course of the experiment. This likely resulted in retention of photosynthates, and starvation of the coral host, as further highlighted by tissue lesions in week two. We argue that
excess N enrichment making it highly susceptible to eutrophication.


MODERN MICROGASTROPOD COMMUNITIES DRIVEN TO DEEPER WATER IN
RESPONSE TO DECLINING WATER QUALITY IN THE MORETON BAY MARINE
PARK, QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 29540)
Subtropical marginal reefs in Moreton Bay Marine Park (MBMP), have experienced
episodic reef growth during Holocene related to periods of sea level and natural climate
change. To explore patterns of ecosystem change during these periods of reef growth,
we examined the community structure of microgastropod assemblages throughout
7500 years of the Holocene, using data from six sediment cores and 30 grab samples
age was estimated by interpolating 35 radiocarbon dates. Non-parametric analysis of
microgastropods indicated no overall change in community structure over almost the
entire temporal sequence (~7500 to ~160 years BP). Despite this apparent ecological
persistence through time, analysis of microgastropods from individual reef sites shows
significant differences in community structure, both among reefs over time as well as
between fossil and modern assemblages. When comparing Holocene microgastropod
assemblages in ‘shallow’ and ‘deep’ paleodepths with modern ‘shallow’ and ‘deep’
depths, we observed modern ‘deep’ microgastropods communities from Myora Reef occurring in deeper waters than their fossil counterparts. These results suggest a decline in
water quality in the modern habitat (~1840) causing habitat shift from shallower subtidal
to deeper subtidal waters. Paleoecology and modern ecology studies can help identify
natural variability versus anthropogenic impact to improve understanding of the future
response of benthic marine communities to human and climate change impacts.


THE INFLUENCE OF UPWELLING ON THE TROPHIC STATUS OF CORALS
FROM THE SHALLOW AND DEEP SLOPE IN THE CENTRAL MALDIVES (Abstract
ID: 28980)
Upwelling stimulates primary productivity, which is known to support megafauna but the
influence of upwelling on coral is understudied. Nutrient availability and light are important for coral symbiosis with increasing depth. Here we use natural abundance stable
isotopes to examine the assimilation of carbon (d13C) and nitrogen (d15N) by the coral
host and algal symbiont. We investigate how depth, reef exposure and atoll position affects the trophic status of three corals. The central Maldives is a unique location to study

277

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

the influence of upwelling on coral reefs due to its bathymetry and monsoonal climate.
Temperature records reveal cold-water influxes extend to the deep (30 m) slope, but not
shallow (10 m). Depth and genus significantly affected both isotope compositions. d13C
values significantly differed among coral, with a spectrum of heterotrophy to autotrophy
for Pocillopora and Pachyseris, respectively. Depth significantly affected coral trophic status, particularly Galaxea, which relied more on heterotrophy at 30 m. Differential d13C
may also indicate diverse fractionation patterns in the symbiont, which we investigate
next. d15N suggest that deep-water nitrate is a primary nitrogen source for these corals.
Moreover, the interaction of i) coral, depth, and atoll position, ii) coral and reef exposure,
and iii) reef exposure and atoll position had a significant effect on both isotope values
of host and symbiont. Our results provide insight into factors influencing coral trophic
status, which is important to consider for coral fitness especially during thermal stress.

A NOVEL GLOBAL PLATFORM FOR MONITORING CORAL HEALTH: CORALSPEQ (Abstract ID: 28663)
Peter Ralph, Atsuko Kanazawa, David Kramer, Milan Szabo, Joey Crosswell, Mathieu
Pernice, Madeline Combe, David Suggett CoralspeQ is a novel optical sensor array that
has been deployed to assess reef condition exposed to the 2016 El Niño mass bleaching event. The sensor is a handheld, submersible, low cost device, which comprises a
microspectrometer with a series of LEDs to measure fluorescence and reflectance of
algal and host pigments. Corals are exposed to a combination of excitation light and the
resulting emission spectra are captured for analysis, including the ratio of fluorescence
emission required to yield photosynthetic health. Field validation trials have shown the
utility of this instrument to identify shifts in both host and symbiont pigments (green and
orange fluorescent pigments), as well as assessing changes in the photosynthetic properties of the symbiont. Data processing is performed by cloud-based analytical routines
available to all users, such that once the data archive becomes significantly large it opens
the possibility for “big data” style analysis. We have already distributed units to marine
park rangers around the globe. This novel sensor provides the first globally operational
platform for long-term community-based monitoring of reef health, as well as a synoptic
but standardised and “on the ground” measure of coral condition desperately needed to
improve predictive algorithms of bleaching and disease susceptibility. The CoralspeQ is
part of the PhotosynQ family of instruments developed by the Kramer Lab at Michigan
State University.


FISH DIVERSITY OF THE ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS (Abstract ID:
27777 | Poster ID: 81)
ABSTRACT Andaman and Nicobar islands situated in the Bay of Bengal between 6o45´
- 13 o 45´ N and 92o10´ – 94o15´E, consist of 572 islands, islets, rocks and cover a distance of almost 800 km over North-South, with a coastline of 1962 km, and bring in for
India an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of 600 thousand km². The shelf topography of
these islands show frequent rises supporting coral reefs, which are characterised as fringing reefs on the eastern side and barrier reefs off west coast; the depressions are known
as passages and straits. Besides coral reefs, the shore is composed of rocky and sandy
areas and vast stretches of mangrove swamps. Owing to the varied marine habitats,
ichthyofauna of these islands is observed to be one of the most diverse in the world.
The fish diversity in these waters also receives special attention in terms of marine zoogeography because of the confluence of Andaman Sea fishes with Western Pacific and
the Indian Ocean. A total of 1489 species of fishes belongs to 580 genera and 165 families were reported from Andaman and Nicobar Islands, of which 139 species belonging
to 57 genera are gobies. Family Gobiidae, the largest group in perciformes, includes
approximately 2000 species which belong to 212 genera and nine families. As of today
from these islands, as many as 62 species of marine fishes are threatened (IUCN, 2014),
4 of them Critically Endangered, 2 Endangered and 40 Vulnerable. Of the 62 threatened
species, most of them (46) are cartilaginous fishes or elasmobranchs—sharks, skates
Distribution, Conservation, Andaman and Nicobar Islands


PLASTICITY OF ESCAPE RESPONSES: HOW EXPERIENCED CORAL REEF FISH
ALTER THEIR ESCAPE PERFORMANCE (Abstract ID: 28283)
Teleost and amphibian prey undertake fast-start escape responses during a predatory
attack in an attempt to avoid being captured. Although previously viewed as a reflex
reaction controlled by the autonomic nervous system, the escape responses of individuals when repeatedly startled are highly variable in their characteristics, suggesting some
behavioural mediation of the response. Previous studies have shown that fishes are able
to learn from past experiences, but few studies have assessed how past experience with
predators affect the fast-start response. Here we determined whether prior experience
with the smell or sight of a predator (the Dottyback, Pseudochromis fuscus) affected
the escape response of juveniles of the Spiny Chromis (Acanthochromis polyacanthus).
Results show that individuals exposed to any of the predator cues prior to being startled
mean response speed, maximum response speed and maximum acceleration) when
compared with controls. This study demonstrates the plasticity of escape responses and
highlights the potential for naïve reef fish to take into account both visual and olfactory
threat cues simultaneously to optimise the amplitude of their kinematic responses to
perceived risk.



SIGNIFICANT INCREASE OF ALCYONACEANS IN VILANGUCHALLI PATCH
REEF, GULF OF MANNAR, INDIA (Abstract ID: 28782)

COASTAL MULTI-SPECIES SMALL-SCALE FISHERIES: INTERACTION AMONG
CORAL REEF, SEAGRASS AND ARTIFICIAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 29729)

Alcyonaceans are an integral part in any healthy reef ecosystem, but have been given
very little attention. Here we report a significant increase of alcyonaceans in Vilanguchalli patch reef of Gulf of Mannar, India where alcyonaceans have been poorly
documented. Data collection was done between 2013 and 2015 on three permanently
marked line intercept and belt transects. Significant fluctuation in both scleractinian and
alcyonacean cover was observed along the transects. Scleractinians decreased from
29.81 to 21.75% whereas alcyonaceas increased from 19.63 to 30.47%. A total of 7 alcyonacean species belong to 4 genera were recorded and Sinularia (79.28%) followed by
Cladiella (13.91%) were the dominant genera. Alcyonaceans outgrew the scleractinians
making considerable coral mortality in Vilanguchalli patch reef. Acropora formosa and
Montipora divaricata were the affected scleractinian species with an average mortality
of 8.61 and 1.01% respectively. Corals in Gulf of Mannar show resilience after the halt
of coral mining in 2005. Substrate availability and fast growing nature have resulted in
increased alcyonaceans cover. Studies are in progress to understand their reproductive
season and recruitment.

Management of small-scale fisheries usually involve monitoring and control of landings.
However, the link between fisheries and habitat remains poorly studied and understood.
In order to evaluate the effort led by fisheries on resources and on the sea bottom
of coastal areas, the Amerindian Wayuu community of the Colombian Caribbean
performed a participatory monitoring. Along the 90 km stretch of coastline, 51.117
daily trips were recorded from 2006 to 2014. The removed biomass of target species
by gear as well as used habitat by fleet were studied through multivariate analyses using
PRIMER and PERMANOVA routines. Our findings show that in early studied years, the
target species (snappers, grunts and lobsters) werelargely caught on coral reefs and hard
bottom. However, since 2009 an uncontrolled deploying of artificial reefs upon seagrass
and coral reef was promoted by the speargun and encircling gillnet fleets, respectively.
Consequently, a strong impact is occurring on both target species and habitat. The lane
snapper and the white grunt, which are the highest valued and the most landed species,
respectively, largely reduced their total catches. Besides, several species of parrotfish
that contribute to coral reef health were greatly removed from ecosystem. Additionally,
the artificial reefs were involved in the largest catches of small sizes of spiny lobster.
Consequently, coral reef and seagrass were affected by fleet operations and deployment
of artificial reefs. An adequate sustainability of fisheries should involve management of
fishing substrate.


278

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



BRIAREUM ASBESTINUM: A TALE OF ONE HOST WITH TWO MORPHOLOGIES
AND SYMBIODINIUM (Abstract ID: 28299)

FUNCTIONAL REDUNDANCY IN EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC REEFS (Abstract
ID: 29435 | Poster ID: 511)

The octocoral Briareum asbestinum exhibits branching and encrusting morphologies
at the same shallow water Caribbean habitat. We investigated the symbiosis between
Symbiodinium and these morphs at ambient and elevated temperatures. The branching
Encrusting fragments exhibited lower algal photochemical and light absorption efficiencies, in part due to colony orientation and the nearly three times higher irradiance levels
photosynthetic rates cm-2. Unlike in many scleractinian corals, elevated temperature did
differed. At the elevated temperature, Symbiodinium in the branching morph made small
changes to photochemical efficiency and exhibited a lower photosynthesis to respiration ratio while the algae in the encrusting morph reduced maximum photochemical
efficiency. The host morphologies also differed in polyp expansion behavior and protein
and the host-Symbiodinium genotypic combination.

Analysis of functional diversity in coral reefs have been mainly based in the study of
fish communities without considering the ecological role of macroinvertebrates. In this
study we calculated functional diversity of an assemblage of fish and macroinvertebrates
species resident in the tropical eastern Pacific (TEP) on the basis of morphofunctional
groups (MFG) formed from information of trophic level and body measures. Visual
census (n= 854) were performed in 18 sites of the TEP distributed in four biogeographic
provinces: Cortes, Mexican, Panamic and Oceanic islands. Functional richness, diversity
and evenness were calculated for each province and compared statistically, and a
regression analysis between taxonomic and functional diversity was made to evaluate
were significant differences in all indices, with the highest total biomass and richness of
MFG occurring in the Cortes and Oceanic islands provinces, and the highest functional
diversity in the Mexican province. Finally, there was a positive relationship between species and functional diversity, which followed a power model and presented similar slope
values for all provinces. This result represents the evidence of functional redundancy in
the TEP reef assemblage at similar levels in all the region. However, the dominance and
distribution of biomass in the MFG is different between provinces: Oceanic island’s reefs
presented higher biomass of predators attributed to less fishing pressure in these areas.



HINDCASTING RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE ENVIRONMENT AND OUTBREAKS OF CORAL DISEASES IN THE CARIBBEAN (Abstract ID: 29643)
Disease outbreaks have contributed to the significant loss of coral populations in the
Caribbean, and occur when the tripartite relationships among the coral hosts, the
pathogens, and the environment are altered. Yet, it is unknown what role historical and
contemporary environmental conditions play in driving coral-disease dynamics. Here
we used boosted-regression tree models to hindcast the relationships between outbreaks
of four Caribbean-coral diseases and a suite of abiotic and biotic predictors. We parsed
the data into temporal windows — before and after major thermal-stress events — to
examine whether the relationships changed through time. In general, the predictive
performance of the models weakened from 1997 to 2012. This weakening could be
indicative of: (1) the potential adjustment of coral populations to local conditions, (2)
the loss of susceptible individuals from the populations, or (3) a decrease in diseasetransmission due to decreased coral densities. A cyclical pattern was observed in the
response of yellow-band disease on Orbicella spp. to maximum sea-surface temperature.
Relationships were weak before the thermal-stress events, whereas after 1998 and 2005,
there were strong negative relationships. A similar cyclical pattern was observed in the
response of white-band disease on Acropora spp. to sea-surface temperature metrics.
These results suggest that Caribbean-coral diseases experience long-term fluctuations,
but whether these interactions with the environment are biased toward the hosts or the
pathogens will determine future trends.

FIVE MPAS, ONE NETWORK: DESIGNING PUERTO RICO’S NORTHEAST MARINE CORRIDOR (Abstract ID: 29571 | Poster ID: 647)
Puerto Rico’s Northeast Marine Corridor is a network of five marine protected areas encompassing an area of over 100 square miles. It has high coral cover, extensive seagrass
beds, endangered coral species, marine mammals and important turtle nesting beaches.
It also provides an economically and culturally important area forrecreation including
tourism and commercial fishing. The main human threats are boater activity, fishing
pressure and land-based sources of pollution. A management plan and a local management support group are being developed after three years of research, including coastal
hydrodynamics, ecological characterization, and social and economic uses of the area.
Several management measures being considered for implementation are no-anchoring
zones, expansion of existing no-take areas, and restriction of human uses in ecologically
sensitive areas. Given the large extent of the reserve network, a co-management structure based on “ridge-to-reef” approach is being considered for the several territorial and
federal agencies with jurisdictional responsibilities over the area. The marine corridor
along with the management approach being taken is the first of its kind in Puerto Rico.
The design and approach could provide and example for use not only in the broader
Caribbean region, but globally as well.



THE EFFECTS OF A CHANGING MARINE ENVIRONMENT ON THE BIOERODING SPONGE CLIONA ORIENTALIS (Abstract ID: 28862)

INTEGRATING CORAL RESILIENCE PRINCIPLE TO CLIMATE CHANGE INTO
MARINE PROTECTED AREAS MANAGEMENT: A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT IN THE WIO (Abstract ID: 30165)

Excavating sponges, such as Cliona spp., break up the coral reef substratum thereby influencing net reef accretion. Sponge erosion is expected to accelerate as oceans become
warmer and more acidic, with Cliona expected to play a major role in future reef growth.
In addition, a greater abundance of Cliona is evident at sites with poor water quality,
suggesting that sponge erosion will have a greater impact on inshore reefs. This project
investigated the effects of temperature, dissolved nutrients, and ocean acidification onCliona orientalis and its associated Symbiodinium. Sponges were exposed to temperatures
surface temperature. As seen in many coral species, the sponge symbiosis bleached at
high temperatures and the photosynthetic capacity of Symbiodinium was compromised.
similarly to stressors associated with inshore coral reefs. Erosion, calcification, respiration, and photosynthetic rates indicate that the two taxa exhibit differential responses to
elevated pCO2 than Poritessp., suggesting that the bioeroding sponge is more likely to
tolerate future conditions on inshore reefs.

The first MPAs in Madagascar were established before the 1990s, when the notion of
coral reef resilience was not yet popularized. In recent decades, the concept of resilience
became more salient and essential for improving coral reef conservation. Effective
management requires continuous feedback to reach the established goals and achieve
tangible conservation benefits. Here we demonstrate how the integration of coral reef
resilience concepts into MPA management led to successful conservation actions by
the park authorities in Madagascar. In March 2014, monitoring for reef resilience was
conducted in four of Madagascar’s oldest MPAs (Nosy Antafana, Tanjona, Masaola and
Tampolo). Two stations in each MPA were sampled to assess six parameters of reef
resilience: benthos cover, coral recruitment, coral Shannon-Wiener diversity index, coral
bleaching, invertebrate abundance and herbivorous fish biomass. The results indicated a
similar biomass of herbivorous fish in all sites (380.84±80.78 kg/ha). Coral recruitment
(colonies of juveniles/m2) was significantly higher in Tanjona (16.69 ±4.3) compared to
the 3 other sites (range of 5.2 - 8.2). Macro-invertebrate abundance (individuals/500m2)
was found to be significantly higher in Nosy Antafana (825.8±918.7) compared to the
279

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

strategy that utilizes an ex situ approach to accelerate the growth of common reef-building corals found around the Hawaiian Islands. We aim to mass produce fragments and
modules in a nursery by manipulating variables including temperature, light, water chemistry, and heterotrophic food intake, while reducing sedimentation, disease, competition,
and parasitism. Using this technique, coral fragments can rapidly grow at rates higher
than those found in situ. These genetically-identical fragments will then be re-aggregated
onto various forms to recreate single colonies via colony fusion and transplanted back
onto impacted reefs. The result is larger corals that would have taken a decade or more
to grow naturally, providing an effective method to restore Hawaiian reefs.

other three, with a minimal value at Tampolo (18.5±7.8). Overall, coral reef resilience
indicators were higher for Tanjona, whereas Tampolo had the lowest values. In order to
maintain the resilience of these marine parks, the park authorities undertook to update
the conservation measures.

MAIN SPECIES OF POCILLOPORIDAE (CNIDARIAN, SCLERACTINIAN) ON THE
NOSY TAFARA REEFS, GREAT REEF OF TOLIARA, SOUTH-WESTERN REGION
OF MADAGASCAR (Abstract ID: 28576 | Poster ID: 554)


A study on the Pocilloporidae family (Cnidarian, scleractinian) have been conducted on
the reefs of Nosy Tafara (Southwest, Madagascar) from March, 2nd until Mai 4th, 2015.
It aims to inventory as exhaustive as possible scleractinian to know the site’s condition,
stand characteristics, the coverage rate compared to other groups. Two stations were
selected: Nosy Arakaivo on the platform of the outer slope between 10 to 15 m and
Nosy Velomitahy, in a channel between 8 to 12 m deep. The method “Point Intercept
Transect (PIT)” to 5 cm intervals placed along a line of 10 m, composed of 15 replicas
were applied to each station. Fragments of species and / or colonies intercepted by the
line were inventoried, sampled and photographed. Fragments of corals were collected
and identified under a dissecting microscope. The results show the outer part of the reef
Nosy Arakaivo has 75.20% of living coral. It is 70.20% for the reef Nosy Velomitahy.
16.17% of corals Nosy Arakaivo belong to the family of Pocilloporidae and 8.81% for
the Nosy Velomitahy. 9/34 Pocilloporidae species identified throughout the Indo-Pacific
region were surveyed, of which 7 species on the Nosy Arakaivo and 6 species on the
Nosy Velomitahy. These species are divided into 3 genus: Pocillopora, Stylophora and
Seriatopora.

CORAL DISEASES: TEASING OUT THE ROLE OF BACTERIA AND FUNGI (Abstract ID: 28169 | Poster ID: 144)
Coral reefs are rapidly declining due to increasing anthropogenic stressors and environmental changes. A major consequence of human pollution is coral diseases, the
underlying pathological causes of which are mostly unknown. Most studies related to
the holobiont and disease focus on bacteria, however, very few studies have investigated
the role of fungi in compromised coral health. There are few studies on coral diseases
in South China Sea. Vietnam’s coral reefs experience rapid deterioration, which is easily
Vietnam provides a good comparison of stressed and non-stressed areas with heavily
developed cities compared to the Marine Protected Areas. This study aims to identify
coral fungi and bacteria in stressed and non-stressed habitats in Porites spp., comparing
the portfolios between different habitats in southern Vietnam, and identifying pathogenic
bacterial and fungal growth in sick and healthy corals. The fungal and bacterial profile
of the holobiont will be determined through metabarcoding with MISeq sequencing.
Water samples were collected to provide a background of the microbes in the coral’s
environment. The results will provide identification of bacteria and fungi in corals within
different stress regimes, and additionally, on a smaller scale, identify fungi and bacteria
associated with disease. This is a step forward towards the understanding of the complex
holobiont and drivers that influences the heath of the corals.


CRYPTIC CORAL REEF DIVERSITY AND FUNCTION ACROSS THE PACIFIC ASSESSED USING AUTONOMOUS REEF MONITORING STRUCTURES (ARMS) AND
METAGENOMIC METHODS (Abstract ID: 29942)


Coral reefs provide essential habitats for rare, cryptic and symbiotic species that make
up the vast majority of reef diversity. However, the complexity of reef habitats and lack
of standardized measures are major obstacles in assessing these communities. As a
Standardized 3-dimensional samplers (ARMS) mimicking the structural complexity of
reefs were deployed at 60 sites across 5 environmental gradients in the Pacific. After 3
years living organisms were quantitatively extracted from these ARMS, each yielding
3 bulk-collected samples — sessile organisms and motile species of 2 size classes
(100-500µm and 500µm - 2mm). Three amplicon libraries were constructed per sample
for high-throughput sequencing: COI and 18S rRNA genes for Metazoans and the 16S
rRNA gene for their associated bacteria. Metagenomic libraries were constructed at
selected sites to examine microbial metabolism and changes in functional gene families
across gradients of environmental impact and species composition. This data allows us
to characterize cryptic Metazoan diversity across Pacific reefs and establish patterns of
bacterial diversity, which clusters foremost by island chain. We investigate the fundamental links between Metazoan communities and their associated microbiota and between
species diversity and ecosystem function at a time when understanding the effects of
environmental shifts on marine ecosystems is paramount.

IDENTIFYING COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT PRIORITIES USING PHOTOGRAPHY (Abstract ID: 29114)
Effective marine protected area (MPA) management requires the support of local communities. To achieve this, community concerns and knowledge must be understood and
incorporated into management plans. Photovoices has developed a powerful tool to
assess community priorities, which provides a way to hear villagers’ unfiltered opinions
and allows managers to learn from their expertise. We implemented this tool in a grassroots planning process in a highly touristed area on the east coast of Bali, Indonesia.
Villagers in two communitities in the Regency of Karangasem were given cameras and
encouraged to take photographs of any issues related to coral reef management. Trained
facilitators gathered the stories behind the pictures, creating a visual and narrative
compilation of local issues. Through this process, the community was able to identify
three priority management areas: sedimentation, trash, and poor regulation of tourism
activity. These key concerns are being incorporated into marine conservation strategies
and management plans. The collection of information has been done by the community
voluntarily, which has contributed to building a spirit of partnership within and between
local communities that will foster collaborative co-management. We will present our
approach, successes to date and lessons learned.



THE FAST-GROWTH PROTOCOL: ACCELERATING CORAL GROWTH FOR REEF
RESTORATION IN THE HAWAIIAN ARCHIPELAGO (Abstract ID: 28205)

HERBIVORE DISTRIBUTIONS MAY NOT ACCURATELY REFLECT HERBIVORY
PATTERNS IN RECOVERING REEFS (Abstract ID: 28619 | Poster ID: 291)

Tropical coral reefs worldwide have a high economic and environmental value. Changes
due to natural and anthropogenic factors have led to numerous reef restoration efforts.
The success and scale of these projects have been highly variable. The majority of work
has focused on in situ nurseries where larger colonies are fragmented and allowed to
grow in a natural setting. This has shown promise where growth rates are high, but in
Hawaii, calcification rates are amongst the slowest globally. We have developed a new

As the uncertainties of a changing climate increasingly threaten the fate of coral reefs,
understanding the inherent ability of reefs to recover from disturbances becomes critical.
Herbivore fish populations are key drivers of reef resilience, mediating competition between coral and algae and promoting coral recruitment. However, herbivores represent
a diverse assemblage,encompassing a range of feeding preferences, movement patterns

280

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

and behaviours; how these distribute across the reefscape can have important implications for reef recovery. Herbivores range widely, and their distribution can be highly
variable in space and time, associated with different uses of the reefscape – for foraging,
refuge, social interactions and others. We examined patterns of herbivore abundance
and function in the Lakshadweep Archipelago, a few years after a coral mass mortality,
to determine if their distribution between depths linked directly to herbivory rates at
reefs. There was a strong relationship between abundance and herbivory in shallow reefs
but not in intermediate and deep reefs, suggesting that herbivore distributions do not
link completely with the distribution of ecosystem function. Behavioural observations
showed that herbivores spent most of their time foraging in the shallows; in deeper reefs
they were more than twice in density but spent most of the time skulking, potentially due
to the availability of refuge which was extremely patchy in shallow reefs. Understanding
how herbivores use the reefscape may be critical to determining their functional roles in
recovering reefs.

AMERICAN SAMOA’S MARINE MANAGED AREAS: DESIGNING AND ASSESSING MARINE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN A MULTI-LEVEL GOVERNANCE
SYSTEM (Abstract ID: 27770 | Poster ID: 639)
reef area under no-take MPAs as a primary marine conservation strategy. The territory
implements MPAs through the use of diverse governance approaches, involving a
range of institutions operating at different scales and including federal, territorial, and
local village entities. This innovative approach to management takes advantage of the
territory’s traditional marine tenure system while drawing upon resources available from
expanded to encompass approximately 25% of coral reef area in the territory, with
nearly 7% of reefs in no-take reserves. This represents a level of resource protection
and inter-institutional collaboration that is unusual in the Pacific, and indeed worldwide.
The innovative institutional arrangements developed to implement this system of MPAs
present both unique challenges and opportunities in the management of the territory’s
marine resources. This paper represents the first comprehensive description and
governance analysis of the MPA system in American Samoa, including the opportunities
and challenges involved in combining Western management approaches with Samoan
cultural institutions and tenure systems, compliance with and enforcement of village,
and consideration of scale in MPA planning, design, and implementation.


PHOTO PROTECTIVE EFFECT OF RU (II) AND CO (III) COMPOUNDS ON THE
SYMBIOTIC ZOOXANTHELLAE ISOLATED FROM THE SEA ANEMONE STICHODACTYLA HADDONI (Abstract ID: 29185 | Poster ID: 496)


As a result of increasing threat to the survival of corals due to changing climate, efforts
are being made to mitigate the effects of stress on corals and its symbionts. While
increased seawater temperature results in coral bleaching, high irradiance effects the
cellular mechanisms in zooxanthellae. In this study, zooxanthellae cells were treated with
two photo-protective compounds to understand their effect on the ability of zooxanthelle to resist irradiance stress. we isolated and cultured zooxanthellae cells (clade C)
form the sea anemone Stichodactyla haddoni. The cultures in log phase were treated
with two photo-protective compounds namely, Ruthenium complex [Ru(bpy)2imbenzim]
(ClO4)2 and Cobalt complex [Co(bpy)2imbenzim](ClO4)3, where bpy is bipyridyl and
imbenzim is imidazolylbenzimidazole ligand, at different concentrations (10, 50 and 100
µm l-1) and maintained under culture conditions for seven days. Results showed that the
cultures treated with Ru (II) remained viable and the Co (III) treated cells showed cellular
disruptions. Ru (II) complex treated cells exposed to high irradiance conditions (1000
µmol m-2s-1) showed that the cells treated with 10 µm l-1 and 50 µm l-1 concentrations
were more viable and retained the photosynthetic pigments without any cellular damage
compared to the control cells that were not treated with photo-protectant. The results of
this study could have merit in terms of proactive conservation strategy of coelenterates
such as corals that are frequently affected by the bleaching events.

EVALUATING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE AMERICAN SAMOA COMMUNITYBASED FISHERIES MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (Abstract ID: 29002)
The Community-Based Fisheries Management Program of the American Samoan
Department of Marine and Wildlife Resources was adapted from a Samoan model in
2005 in order to establish co-managed MPAs with communities throughout the territory.
Ten communities are currently involved and they have requested assistance in improving
their fisheries. In response, we designed a multi-phase process to assess management
of CFMP sites based on published templates, the program’s specific needs, and the
available site specific information. Phase I focuses on reorganizing and enhancing record
keeping and was carried out for several sites so far. Phase II was designed to further
analyze site management in order to readdress social and ecological design and set
realistic goals for the future. Both phases of assessments are presented in a score card
format so that progress can be tracked over time, sites can be ranked, and management
efforts can be prioritized. While the program successfully encourages coral reef management in American Samoa, our preliminary assessments point to major concerns for
underutilization of available social and ecological data to drive the direction of management. Literature on MPA design and effectiveness suggests that only one CFMP MPA is
likely to be large enough to protect commercially targeted fish. Seasonal openings of the
majority of MPAs also raises concerns for their effectiveness in meeting fisheries related
goals. In this presentation we discuss social complexities specific to American Samoa,
lessons learned, and future directions for the CFMP program.

OLD WOUNDS TAKE LONG TO HEAL: SHIP GROUNDINGS AND CORAL DISEASE ON A
PRISTINE CORAL REEF (Abstract ID: 28534)

The coral reefs of Tubbataha, Sulu Sea, are among the most pristine reefs remaining
in the world, supporting 72% live coral and the highest fish biomass in the Philippines.
In 2013, two ship groundings occurred within four months: the US minesweeper USS
Guardian (USSG) on the South Atoll and the Chinese fishing vessel F/V Min Ping Yu
(MPY) on the North Atoll. An estimated reef area of 6,248 m2 was critically damaged.
In April 2015, we tested the hypothesis that physical damage to corals increased subsequent susceptibility to disease. We identified three zones associated with each grounding
site: a “ground zero” zone of coral obliteration, where ships had pulverized underlying
reef; a border zone on either side of ground zero where ship shifting caused additional
damage to existing coral; and adjacent intact zones outside the footprint of ship impacts
that served as control sites. ‘Ground zero’ zones had low coral density and recent recruits
with little to no disease. Border zones had lower coral density than intact zones, but
significantly higher prevalence of the coral disease white syndrome and chronic partial
mortality (USSG WS: border zone=13.6%, control site=3.2%; partial mortality: border
zone=33.7%, control site=7.4%; MPY WS: border zone=16.2%, control site=7.6%; partial mortality: border zone=27.8%, control site=16%). Our results suggest that, despite
pristine reef condition, and high recruitment and herbivory, impacts of these physically
destructive events extended beyond the immediate obliteration of coral and loss of reef
structure, to persistent effects on coral health.


SEASONAL PATTERNS OF GROWTH IN THE ROBUST BRANCHING CORAL
ISOPORA PALIFERA FROM THE CENTRAL GREAT BARRIER REEF, AUSTRALIA
(Abstract ID: 28526 | Poster ID: 234)
Studies on the growth response of corals to changing climate have largely focused on
long-lived corals with relatively distinct density bands such as massive Porites. Little
is known about the climatic response of other more abundant growth forms, such as
branching Acropora corals, largely because of the absence of density bands. Using a
combination of X-radiography, gamma-densitometry, Sr/Ca analysis and U-Th dating,
we quantified growth patterns in the branching Isopora palifera from the central Great
Barrier Reef, Australia. Visual analysis of positive X-radiographs revealed patterns of
high-low density bands along the main growth axis, although gamma-densitometry was
unable to detect a clear annual pattern in all samples. Skeletal Sr/Ca ratios consistently
revealed clear patterns of seasonality matching local seawater temperatures, providing
a growth chronology to calculate extension rates (averaging 2.07±0.09 cm yr-1). Using
the Sr/Ca maxima, we were able to calculate annual density (1.57±0.03 g cm-3) and
calcification rate (3.24±0.13 g cm-2 yr-1). Calibrations of monthly average SST and


281

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

that of Porites from the same location, implying that the relationship between skeletal
Sr/Ca and SST is highly robust among taxa, morphology, and growth rate. Our approach
provides a robust method for assessing changes in growth for a common Indo-Pacific
branching coral, and provides a valuable framework for quantifying past and future
changes in skeletal growth in response to climate change.

TEMPORAL VARIATION AND COMPARISON OF THE STATUS OF CORAL REEFS
IN SELECTED SITES IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 28548)
This study investigates the temporal changes of the condition of coral reefs in two sites
from three regions in the Philippines. Results showed a significant increase in coral cover
in the southern side of Baladingan, Masbate from poor (14+4%) in 2009 to fair (28+3%)
in 2015. Comparatively, coral cover in Guang-guang, Davao Oriental showed no
significant difference despite the seeming increase from 27+10% in 2010 to 38+6% in
In Negros Oriental, a long-term study of Apo Chapel revealed a significantly increasing
trend over a 17-year period from 19+8% in 1999 to 60+19% in 2005 and since then has
remained in good condition for 11 years. This site also has the highest species diversity.
No change was observed in Bantayan marine sanctuary for over 21 years with only
18+15% in 1995 to 24+8% in 2015. Comparison of current data between sites in each
region showed statistically similar coral cover in Masbate and Davao Oriental. In Negros
Oriental, Apo Chapel has significantly higher cover than Bantayan marine sanctuary. All
sites exhibited good condition indices despite the low coral cover in some. Reef development was good in Apo Chapel and the sites in Davao Oriental. Poor reef development
in Masbate and Bantayan was due to high abitoic-related components. Mortality indices
level of protection, exposure to natural and anthropogenic disturbances and species
composition influencing these changes are discussed.



SHIFTING THE MANAGEMENT PARADIGM AT RAINE ISLAND, THE WORLD’S
LARGEST GREEN TURTLE ROOKERY – TO INTERVENE OR NOT TO INTERVENE? (Abstract ID: 29176)
Raine Island, a tiny cay in the northern Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, Australia,
supports the largest aggregation of nesting green turtles in the world. There have been
population studies on the nesting green turtles since the mid-1970s and this work has
made significant contributions to informing our understanding and management of this
species. However, studies in the late 1990s indicated that nesting and hatching success
of the green turtles at Raine Island was very low when compared with other rookeries
and that levels of adult mortality due to heat exhaustion, toppling over phosphate
cliffs and getting caught in beachrock crevices were elevated. In order to improve the
resilience of the nesting green turtle population at Raine Island, it was clear management agencies needed to do something to reverse the observed trends. Getting to the
