the Western Gulf of Thailand and Ao Losama, Mu Ko Phi Phi, the Andaman Sea.
Three dive sites were classified as common while eight dive sites were categorized as
Ao Losama, are still much lower than that causes the outbreaks in other regions. The
recorded during the last three decades. This study contributes the important background
planci in dive sites of Thailand.

ASSESSING THE FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY OF REEF FISH HERBIVORES (AND
DETRITIVORES?) USING A COMPOUND-SPECIFIC STABLE ISOTOPE APPROACH (Abstract ID: 28844 | Poster ID: 513)
Tropical coral reefs around the world are known to support a wide diversity and
abundance of herbivorous reef fishes. These fishes play a key role in helping to maintain
healthy reef ecosystems by clearing algae and creating space for corals to settle. The
term herbivore however, includes a wide variety of species with different feeding
methods, including browsing, excavating, grazing, and scraping, which all may help these
fishes specialize their diets to specific plants, (epilithic) algae, or other components of
the detrital pool. We use compound-specific stable isotope analysis (CSIA) paired with
Bayesian mixing models to compare the functional dietary diversity of herbivorous reef
fishes. We compare the isotopic signatures of &delta13C values in fish tissue, fish foreguts,
and dietary end members across acanthurids, scarids, and other fishes with dietary end
members represented by brown, green, red, and epilithic algae groups. CSIA mixing
model results and diet diversity will be discussed in the context of niche partitioning on
coral reefs. The partitioning of herbivorous reef fishes into multiple food niches may help
explain why such a high diversity and abundance of herbivorous fish species are found
on some reefs, despite outwardly appearing to feed on the same food source.
http://CSIA_herbivorous_reef_fishes_diet


ENGAGING RESOURCE USERS TO IDENTIFY SOCIAL AND ECOLOGICAL
Resource users provide valuable information on marine ecosystem change, but their
observations and perceptions of change may differ from other sources of available
monitoring data. This creates potential for conflict and may reduce the legitimacy of
management measures in the eyes of resource users. Coral trout is targeted throughout the Asia-Pacific for the live finfish trade, and this market forms an economically
significant fishery in Queensland, Australia. While monitoring occurs in the Queensland
fishery, detailed data have only been collected over the last few decades. Through interviews with 120 commercial and recreational coral trout fishers, we assessed ecological
and social changes in Queensland’s coral trout fishery across a period of 60 years to
inform baseline conditions and to highlight areas of contention and agreement between
scientific data and resource user observations. The majority of resource users observed
declines in catch rate of coral trout. These declines began several decades prior to the


HAWAI`I’S CLIMATE IN 2050 CE (Abstract ID: 28406)
This presentation will provide an overview of the projected large-scale changes of
Pacific surface temperature, wind systems, sea level and ocean biogeochemistry over
the next 35 years. Regional-scale projections for the Hawaiian Islands will be discussed

345

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

among symbiotic taxa and suggests that the intrinsic aspects of species biology may
contribute more to the phylogeographic histories of each taxon than extrinsic forces that
shape whole communities.

along with uncertainties stemming from modeling biases, unresolved physics, socioeconomic decisions and natural variability.


SYMBIOSIS AND NUTRITIONAL STATE ALTER THE CNIDARIAN CELL CYCLE
The cnidarian-dinoflagellate endosymbiosis relies on the cellular coordination of its two
partners, algal symbionts and the host cnidarian cells that contain them. We examined
the effect of nutritional status and symbiotic state on host cell proliferation in the sea
anemone Aiptasia sp., and its resident algal symbionts Symbiodinium clade B1, a model
system for coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis. Anemones under three different symbiotic
conditions: symbiotic, aposymbiotic (without symbionts) and colonizing (aposymbiotic
animals being re-colonized with algae) were labeled with S-phase marker ethynyl deoxyuridine (EdU), G2/M-phase marker histone H3pSer10, and Hoechst dye. In symbiotic
anemones, host DNA replication and cell division was lowest at night and significantly
peaked in the afternoon. Symbiotic state and nutritional status had a strong interaction
effect; starvation significantly increased replication and division rates in aposymbiotic
anemones but decreased rates in symbiotic anemones. Gastrodermal tissue of starved
aposymbiotic animals had significantly higher replication and division rates than the gastrodermis of symbiotic and fed aposymbiotic animals. We also examined division rates
during onset of symbiosis. There were no significant rate changes between nutritional
states, and rates appeared similar to those of aposymbiotic groups. Starvation also had
a positive effect on symbiont proliferation. Our results suggest that host cell cycle and
proliferation respond to long-term environmental change and symbiont state.

EXPLORING ENVIRONMENTAL AND GEOGRAPHIC PATTERNS OF CORAL
REEF CRYPTOFAUNA COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 28725)
One of the most fundamental questions in ecology concerns the drivers of community
distributions and abundances. Here we examine motile marine invertebrate cryptofauna communities captured within Autonomous Reef Monitoring Structures deployed
across Pacific Islands. Using raw data and distance-based approaches of beta-diversity,
we examine to what extent environmental factors, such as nutrients, temperature and
coral cover, and geographical location explain variation in community organization.
Through variance partitioning and the “decay of similarity with distance”, we investigate
whether the environment or geography have a greater influence in observed cryptofauna
composition. Observations on species occurrence, diversity, and abundance, together
with environmental correlates, are starting points to understanding the distributions and
community organization of reef cryptofauna. Further analyses on historical biogeography and evolution will need to additionally take place in order to better understand the
mechanisms that may have shaped these communities.



UNDERSTANDING CORAL’S SHORT-TERM ADAPTIVE ABILITY TO WATER POLLUTION USING GENETICS AND PROTEOMICS (Abstract ID: 28208)
Corals in Maunalua Bay, Hawaii are under chronic pressure from sedimentation and
terrestrial runoff containing multiple toxicants as a result of large-scale urbanization that
has taken place in the last 100 years. However, some individual corals thrive despite the
prolonged exposure to these environmental stressors, which suggests that these individuals may have adapted to withstand such stressors. The lobe coral Porites lobata from the
‘high-stress’ nearshore site had an elevated level of stress induced proteins, compared
to those from the ‘low-stress,’ less polluted offshore site, and genetic analysis revealed
clear genetic differentiation between corals at the two sites, which are less than 2 km. To
understand whether selection is driving the observed differentiation, a 30-day reciprocal
transplant experiment was conducted. Protein expression profiles, as well as other
stress-related physiological characteristics were compared in corals between the sites.
The results suggest that the nearshore genotype can cope better with sedimentation and
pollution than the offshore genotype, which indicates that the observed genetic differentiation is due to selection for tolerance to these environmental stressors. Understanding
the little-known, linage-scale genetic variation in corals offers critical insight into their
short-term adaptive ability, which is indispensable for protecting corals from impending
environmental stressors and climate change.

ARE SEA FAN SCLERITES THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE AGAINST PATHOGENS? (Abstract ID: 29507 | Poster ID: 135)
Sessile organisms such as octocorals cannot avoid threats such as predation, parasitism
or fungal infections through evasive responses. Instead, they relay on strategies that deter
or reduce the impact of these threats. One such strategy is the development of anatomical structure known as sclerites, which are minute calcium carbonate structures laying
on top of the ectoderm and within the mesoglea and gastrodermal tube walls. Sclerites
have multiple roles, including structural support of the colony and predator deterring.
However, the role of sclerites as a physical barrier that deters fungal infection is yet to
be studied. In this study, we examine the potential role of sea fan sclerites as protection
from fungal infection. To accomplish this, we inoculated four different fungi isolated from
healthy sea fans into 5ml pipettes filled with culture media and on top of it sclerites from
healthy and diseased fans. To determine whether chemical compounds associated with
the sclerites impact infection, sclerites from healthy and diseased fans were extracted for
several days with acetone prior to inoculation. Results showed that the sclerite layer delayed fungal infection of the agar when compared to controls (pipettes with agar but no
sclerites). There were no difference between pipettes with healthy and diseased sclerites,
but there were differences among sclerites extracted with acetone. This study indicates
that, in addition to the structural support and predator deterring roles, sclerites may also
play a role as physical and chemical barriers to fungal infection.


COMPARATIVE PHYLOGEOGRAPHY IN A MULTI-LEVEL SEA ANEMONE
SYMBIOSIS: EFFECTS OF HOST SPECIFICTY ON PATTERNS OF CO-DIVERSIFICATION AND GENETIC DIVERSITY (Abstract ID: 28182)


Specialist and generalist life histories are expected to result in contrasting levels of
genetic diversity at the population level, yet symbioses are expected to lead to patterns
that reflect a shared biogeographic history and co-diversification. We test these assumptions using a comparative phylogeographic approach for six co-occurring crustacean
species that are symbiotic with sea anemones on western Atlantic coral reefs, yet vary in
their host specificities. We first conducted species discovery analyses to delimit cryptic
lineages, followed by classic population genetic diversity analyses for each delimited
taxa. The demographic history for each taxon was reconstructed using traditional
summary statistics, Bayesian Skyline Plots, and approximate Bayesian computation to
test for signatures of recent and concerted population expansion. The genetic diversity
values recovered here contravene the expectations of the specialist-generalist variation
hypothesis and classic population genetics theory: all specialist lineages had greater
genetic diversity than generalists. Demographic reconstruction recovered evidence of
recent population expansions using summary statistics, yet Bayesian skyline plots and
approximate Bayesian computation suggest the timing and magnitude of these events
were idiosyncratic. These results do not meet the a priori expectation of concordance

TEMPERATURE SHUFFLES CORAL-ALGAL SYMBIOSIS IN THE SOUTH CHINA
SEA (Abstract ID: 30046 | Poster ID: 132)
With sea surface temperature (SST) increasing, scleractinian corals are exposed to
bleaching threats but may possess certain flexibilities in terms of their associations with
symbiotic algae. Previous studies have shown a close symbiosis between corals and
Symbiodinium; however, the spatial variation of the symbiosis and the attribution underlying are not well understood. In the present study, we examined coral-algal symbiosis in
Galaxea fascicularis and Montipora spp. from three biogeographic regions across ~10°
of latitude in the South China Sea. Analysis of similarities (ANOSIM) indicated a highly
level and redundancy analysis (RDA) using subclade data suggested that temperature
was the main factor contributing to the diversity of Symbiodinium across three regions.
The geographic specificity of the Symbiodinium phylogeny was identified, revealing possible environmental selection across the three regions. In addition, Symbiodinium ITS2

346

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

has shown persistent fish stock declines and coral reef degradation. Despite decades of
management strategies, including controversial fishing regulations and the implementation of marine reserves, coral reef ecosystems continue to decline due to local threats
and global climate change. Our work aimed to quantify environmental transformations
observed in watershed, coastal and marine areas, and subsequently understand the relative importance of human dimensions over reported fish stocks in a spatial and historical
context. We focused on Puerto Real, a traditional fishing community in southwest Puerto
Rico, by generating and analyzing detailed decadal land cover maps (1963-2010), conducting reef characterizations, deriving water quality parameters from Landsat imagery
and watershed modeling using Open-NSPECT, and by compiling local fish stock reports.
We found striking historical changes in land cover, including a significant reduction in
agricultural lands (54.8-0.5%) that gave way to increases in pasture lands (27.1-49.3%),
forest cover (14.4-26.6%), and urban areas (4.4-22.7%). Analyses demonstrate that the
positive effects of reforestation on water quality are outweighed by urban settlements
along the coastal watersheds. Furthermore, temporal degradation and linear gradation
between nearshore and off-shore coral reefs condition appears related to their proximity
to sources of in-land pollution. These findings are strong evidence of the need for rigorous controls over land use practices.

sequences derived from congeneric corals were more likely clustered together, revealing
a correlated coral-algal evolution. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that coral-algal
corals. These results suggest that scleractinian corals may have the ability to regulate
Symbiodinium community structures under different temperatures and thus be able to
adapt to gradual climate change.

WINNERS AND LOSERS OF CYCLONES AND BLEACHING: BENTHIC COMMUNITY CHANGES AFTER MULTIPLE DISTURBANCES (Abstract ID: 28022)
Climate change poses two main challenges for reef building corals: an increment in the
frequency and severity of tropical storms; and ever increasing water temperatures. The
differential susceptibility of coral species to these disturbances means that the affected
coral assemblages temporarily or permanently reconfigure following such disturbances.
To adapt management to the altered ecosystems, we need to better understand how
coral assemblages change and for how long these changes are likely to persist. In this
study I document the effect of a category 5 tropical cyclone and a subsequent thermal
bleaching event on an inshore fringing reef of the Great Barrier Reef. Further to the
transition from branching to massive/encrusting dominance in coral assemblages immediately following the cyclone, and the differences in bleaching mortality among coral
taxa, I show evidence for the density dependence of the recruitment of brooding corals
in the aftermath of the disturbance. I also present a novel method for rapid reef mapping
using geotagging of coral colonies and custom made GIS scripts.


DIFFERENCE OF CALCIFICATION RATE IN THE CORAL PORITES LOBATAFROM
THE EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC: THE EFFECT OF THE MORPHOTYPE AND
THE GENDER (Abstract ID: 27910)
Morpho-plasticity in colony structure is an adaptive strategy upon which some coral
species rely to take advantage of changes in their environment. Despite the importance
of morphologic variability, growth and calcification rates of different coral morphotypes, as well as gender effects on coral morphology, have not been undertaken in the
Eastern tropical Pacific. Comparisons of annual extension rate (cm yr-1), skeletal density
(g cm-3), and calcification rate (g cm-2 yr-1) was evaluated in columnar, massive, and
free-living morphotypes of the common reef-building coral Porites lobatadistributed in
the Central Mexican Pacific. The results showed significant differences in extension
rate, skeletal density, and calcification rate among morphotypes, and also differences in
the interaction of the morphology and the gender. Massive form presented 33% faster
rates in growth parameters compared with columnar and free-living corallith forms.
Male colonies showed 40% faster calcification rate, than females for both columnar and
corallith forms. These data reveal the extensive plasticity of this species and highlight the
fact that each morphotype x gender group results in a different physiological response to
growth form and efforts, developing different forms and growing at different rates, which
helps to the species to maintain their distribution over the coral reef and contribute as a
framework building species in the region.


CHARACTERIZING SYMBIODINIUM DIVERSITY IN CANDIDATE RESILIENT
CORAL SPECIES (Abstract ID: 29049 | Poster ID: 123)
Identifying resilient coral species and understanding determinants underlying resilience
have important implications for coral reef restoration efforts. A key factor contributing
to coral resilience is its obligate symbiotic relationship with photosynthetic single-celled
dinoflagellates (zooxanthellae) predominantly belonging to the genus Symbiodinium. Zooxanthellae composition has been shown to be associated with coral survival in adverse
environmental conditions. Currently however, there is little information on the diversity
and distribution of Symbiodinium clades hosted by coral populations in Philippine archipelagic waters. In this study, we utilized various molecular approaches to characterize
Symbiodiniumdiversity across coral species collected from a) natural populations which
exhibit varied susceptibilities to environmental stress; b) coral fragments subjected to
elevated temperature and lowered pH in a controlled hatchery environment, and fragments exposed directly to anthropogenic nutrient stress. Initial results show the utility
of clade-specific PCR amplification in elucidating dominant Symbiodinium clades in
coral fragments and PCR-DGGE fingerprinting of the zooxanthellae ITS2 gene region in
identifyingSymbiodinium to the subclade level. We present information on the diversity
and distribution of zooxanthellae from candidate resilient coral species, which will be
useful to characterize the potential influence of Symbiodiniumon tolerance and resilience
of the coral holobiont to environmental stress.


ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS ON THE DEVELOPMENT AND DEMISE OF
FLORIDA’S CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28061)
The extraordinary scale and magnitude of recent coral-reef degradation highlights the
urgent need to better understand the long-term controls on reef decline and resilience.
One way to gain insight into the future of coral-reef ecosystems is to evaluate their response to environmental disturbances in the past. Although the decline in Florida’s coral
populations is a recent phenomenon, we show that reef accretion has been negligible on
the Florida Keys reef tract (FKRT) for several millennia. Using more than 60 reef cores
from throughout the FKRT, we reconstructed region-wide trends in reef development
over the last 10,000 years. We used these records to evaluate the relative contributions
of regional changes in sea level, climate, and oceanography to the historic shutdown of
which suggested that changes in regional oceanography associated with rising sea level
contributed to the collapse of reefs in the middle Keys by the mid-Holocene; however,
our records imply that these changes occurred at least 1000 years earlier than previously
thought. Furthermore, the region-wide decline in reef accretion by the late Holocene indicates that the demise of Florida’s reefs may have ultimately been driven by larger-scale
changes in climate and/or sea level. We conclude that although the increasing frequency
of environmental disturbances will likely continue to threaten reef development, local
oceanography may have the potential to modulate the response of reefs to larger-scale
perturbations.


HISTORICAL AND SPATIAL DIMENSIONS OF HUMAN PROCESSES AND THEIR
EFFECTS ON MARINE ECOSYSTEM SERVICES (Abstract ID: 30109)
Overfishing and terrestrial runoff are among the most important anthropogenic threats
to marine ecosystem services. These threats are apparent in Puerto Rico, where research
347

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


the AGRRA methodology and 120m2 was surveyed via the video methodology. Both
methods identified the same trends in coral species richness, abundance, and diversity
at each site; however, the video method also allowed for a more accurate calculation of
percent coral cover. The congruent results of the two methods used here indicates that
the use of GoPro® video technology can allow for faster surveys that are as accurate as
manual survey methods while remaining more cost effective than stereo-video methods.
The use of GoPro® video technology in reef surveys will allow for greater efficiency
and reliability of monitoring in the field, an important advancement for scientists, reef
managers, and conservationists worldwide.

MARINE MONITOR: A LOW COST RADAR FOR MARINE PROTECTED AREAS
(Abstract ID: 28884)
Effective surveillance is essential for marine protected area (MPA) enforcement. Currently, local managers often lack affordable technology, especially in remote locations in
the developing world. To address this gap, the Anthropocene Institute (AI) has developed
the Marine Monitor (M2) system to lower the cost of MPA enforcement. M2 uses offthe-shelf radars to automatically detect up to 30 vessels up to 10nm offshore. Managers
can define MPA boundaries and trigger alarms based on vessel speed and time spent
within zones. E-mail alerts can also be configured and sent based on vessel activity.
AI’s software enables real-time viewing and playback of stored vessel activity, through
a public, online map interface. Using live and historical vessel data, managers can focus
their efforts on specific protected areas, view human use patterns within MPAs, and
strategically enforce regulations. M2 incorporates a low power off-the-shelf radar, satellite telemetry, a dedicated PV power source, and shippable marine grade radar mast. The
M2 system has been successfully tested in California at a fraction of the cost of current
MPA surveillance systems. We are completing the first field installation in Micronesia in
partnership with OneReef Worldwide Stewardship, and will continue improving software
and overall system functionality. Local communities are requesting this resource in Micronesia, Palau, Indonesia, and beyond. By providing affordable radar enforcement, M2
will play a critical role in the successful implementation of nearshore MPAs and enhance
conservation efforts globally.


IS PHOTOSYNTHESIS REQUIRED FOR SYMBIOSIS ESTABLISHMENT AND/OR
MAINTENANCE IN CNIDARIANS? (Abstract ID: 28465)
The mechanisms by which cnidarians recognize and take up their Symbiodinium
endosymbionts remain largely unknown and may involve the physical, chemical, and/
or metabolic properties of the algae. When some Symbiodinium strains are grown in
glucose-containing medium, they undergo a loss of peridinin and chlorophyll pigments,
a reduction in photosynthetic activity, and alterations to the cell surface. In this study, we
used the sea-anemone model system Aiptasia to ask if these changes in the algae affect
their uptake by a host. In comparison to algae grown without glucose, the glucose-grown
algae were taken up significantly more slowly, if at all, by both aposymbiotic adults and
larvae, even when no glucose was present in the seawater during infection. Moreover,
addition of 28 mM glucose to the seawater during infection inhibited uptake of algae by
both adults and larvae even when the algae had been grown without glucose. To ask if
these effects of glucose reflected the reduction in algal photosynthesis, we attempted to
infect adult, aposymbiotic animals with algae that had been cultured in the light without
glucose, but performing the infections either in the dark or in the presence of 25 µM
DCMU, a specific inhibitor of photosystem II activity. In both cases, little or no algal
uptake was observed. Taken together, these results suggest that although other factors
(such as recognition of algal surface markers by host receptors) may also be involved,
algal photosynthesis plays a key role in initiation, establishment, or maintenance of
cnidarian-Symbiodinium symbiosis.


SHORT-TERM TEMPERATURE INCREASE (Abstract ID: 27789)
Coral bleaching caused by global increases in surface seawater temperature is one of
caused by coastal runoff can exacerbate the effects of bleaching on corals. However,
coral feeding on zooplankton (heterotrophy) can alleviate the effects of bleaching on
some corals and confer resilience. Paradoxically, in nature it is rare to find high zooplankton densities without high inorganic nutrients. This study aimed to disentangle the effects
of heterotrophy and inorganic nutrients on the physiological response ofTurbinaria reniformis subject to short-term thermal stress. Three different inorganic nutrient ratios were
tested: control (ambient SW, 0.5 µM NO3, and 0.1 µM PO4), NO3 only (ambient SW and
2 µM NO3), and NO3+PO4 (ambient SW, 2 µM NO3, and 0.5 µM PO4). Each nutrient
level was replicated four times such that two tanks were exposed to heterotrophic food
sources, and two were not. The results show a detrimental effect of NO3 alone on coral
photosynthetic processes and calcification rates under thermal stress when associated
with heterotrophy. However, NO3+PO4 enrichment maintained coral metabolism and
calcification under thermal stress and enhanced physiological parameters when in
concert with heterotrophy. These results shed light on the complex relationship between
inorganic nutrients and heterotrophy, and highlight the relevance of N:P stoichiometry
as a determining factor for the health of the holobiont that may be adapted to specific
nutrient ratios in the surrounding environment.


SHOCK, ILLUMINATES POTENTIAL IMMUNE GENE REACTIONS AND INTERACTIONS (Abstract ID: 27982)
Little is understood about when immunity and stress genes are activated during heat
stress in coral reefs. Previous studies examining heat stress in corals collected samples
after at least a day of heat stress. Nothing is known about when genes become active
during heat stress, and what their temporal patterns of expression look like. In order to
address this, we have sampled six individual corals every half an hour, over a 5-hour
acute heat shock to understand the fine scale pattern of gene expression. From this
dataset we have found that there are varying patterns of expression between individual
immunity genes, and co-expression modules predictive of stress or bleaching found in
previous studies, have fluctuating expression profiles. This dataset is the first to examine
fine scale timing of heat stress, and will inform us about reaction times of genes and
immunity gene interactions.

com


AN ACCURATE AND COST-EFFECTIVE REEF SURVEY METHOD: VIDEO TRANSECTS WITH GOPRO® TECHNOLOGY (Abstract ID: 29727 | Poster ID: 549)
As climate change continues to threaten coral reef ecosystems, the importance of
efficient and accurate means of assessing coral reef health continues to grow. Traditionally, scientists have utilized manual survey methods to quantify species richness,
abundance, and diversity on coral reefs. These manual survey methods require technical
coral identification skills in the field and can be time intensive for sites with high coral
cover and diversity. Here, we quantified coral abundance and diversity of 13 reef sites
along the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System (MBRS) using two methods: 1) a modified
Atlantic and Gulf Rapid Reef Assessment (AGRRA) manual survey methodology and
2) video assessments using GoPro® video technology, a less expensive alternative to
more popular stereo-video techniques. At each site, 60m2 of reef was surveyed via

HETEROTROPHY PROMOTES PHOTOSYNTHATE TRANSLOCATION IN A SYMBIOTIC CORAL DURING THERMAL STRESS (Abstract ID: 28250)
Large-scale coral bleaching events, as a result of elevated seawater temperatures, have
been identified as one of the major causes for worldwide coral mortality. The energetic
status of corals is emerging as a particularly important factor that determines the corals’
vulnerability to thermal stress. However, detailed studies that trace the flow of carbon
(energy) from symbionts to coral host are still missing, although such studies are essential
to assess the nutrient status of corals and predict their resilience to the stress. The pres-

348

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

explanation for this increase is the arrival of humans and the accompanying large-scale
changes across the landscape due to land development, feral and domestic ungulates,
and agriculture. Sediment effects on reef ecology depend on grain size and composition,
depositional area, total load, wave energy, water circulation, and the coral community composition. There is uncertainty about how climate change will alter terrestrial
sediment impacts to Hawaiian reefs. We lack forecasts of rain intensity (which drives
terrestrial erosion). Existing models indicate that by the year 2100, average rainfall across
watersheds near coral reefs will stay the same or decrease. It seems unlikely that the
overall changes in precipitation will lead to a substantial increase in terrestrial runoff
compared to current levels. Management of terrestrial sediment on Hawaiian reefs may
be best ameliorated by management of sediment sources in watersheds regardless of
climate change. Watersheds that discharge into protected bays and areas of restricted
circulation are more likely to affect reefs in those environments than reefs in high-energy
marine settings. Finally, additional research on the ability of Hawaiian corals to adapt
to sediment loading, in conjunction with other climate-change impacts, may provide
insights on how reefs in Hawaii will develop in the future.

ent study reveals the impact of thermal stress on the nutritional interactions between
symbionts and host in the scleractinian coral Stylophora pistillata. First, we demonstrated
that the amount of photosynthetically assimilated carbon retained in the symbionts
was significantly higher during thermal stress than under non-stressful conditions. This
higher photosynthate retention in symbionts lowered the rates of energy transfer to the
host, which required the use of tissue energy reserves to sustain its respiratory needs. In
addition, we found a strong positive correlation between carbon translocation and coral
calcification, thus a significant decrease in skeleton growth was observed during thermal
stress. This study also provides evidence that heterotrophy modulates the negative effects of thermal stress on coral physiology, and enhances the re-establishment of normal
nutritional exchanges between symbionts and host.

THE EMERGENT GEOGRAPHY AND GEOPOLITICAL (MIS)ALIGNMENT OF
DISPERSAL CORRIDORS AND BARRIERS ACROSS THE INDO-WEST PACIFIC
(Abstract ID: 30029)


Although barriers to dispersal are known to contribute to the distinctiveness of communities, species and populations, the importance of the biophysical processes associated
with permeable barriers is not well understood. In this study, we predict the geographic
location and strength of multitaxon dispersal barriers across the Indo- West Pacific
Ocean. Specifically, we ask three questions: (1) What biological attributes are important
in influencing the location and strength of dispersal barriers? (2) What is the geographic
configuration of multitaxon dispersal barriers? (3) Is there geographic concordance with
previously described and empirically based barriers? Although individual taxa varied
in their predicted fine-scale population connectivity, there was broad-scale consistency
in the location of dispersal barriers. Across all trait combinations, reproductive output
(fecundity and density of reproductive adults), reproductive strategy (spawning phenology) and the length of the larval dispersal phase determined the strength of barriers
across the seascape. Finally, I describe a new approach for quantifying the ecologicalinstitutional alignment and mismatch across this environmentally and politically complex
seascape. Intersecting these dispersal barriers and corridors with estimates of crosscountry institutional linkages related to marine management, we identify geopolitical fit
and misfit between the region’s ecological processes and its governance.

AN ASSESSMENT OF SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND INSTITUTIONAL LINKAGES IN
TRANSBOUNDARY MARINE PROTECTED AREA NETWORKS IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29932)
The decentralized government system of the Philippines impedes establishment of
functional marine protected area (MPA) networks, because local governments are
limited by their jurisdictions. To address this challenge, transboundary governance
arrangements were recommended to scale up to form networks. The Philippine Marine
Key Biodiversity Area Project, a technical assistance and development initiative, aims to
improve conservation success of existing and new MPAs and networks by addressing
gaps in protection of ecological processes. However, since transboundary governance is
key to implementing networks, we suggest consideration of institutional and socioeconomic parameters in optimal network designs. We conducted case studies of five MPA
networks with different governance arrangements to determine key socioeconomic and
institutional design parameters. We found that various configurations of the networks,
emerged based on the strength or weakness of the following parameters: (i) consistency
of policies between relevant local governments; (ii) financial benefits are exported
beyond the MPA governance boundary; (iii) existence of medium to long term plans
with funding commitment developed by regional or national planning agencies; (iv) support from communities, and bridging organizations; and (v) adherence to unified policies
or other transboundary agreements Our findings reiterate the need to consider social,
economic and political complexities for designing MPA networks in order to reduce
transaction and management costs, and improve their sustainability.


CELLULAR LOCALIZATION AND POTENTIAL PHYSIOLOGICAL ROLES OF
VACUOLAR PROTON ATPASE, SODIUM POTASSIUM ATPASE, SLC4S, AND
PLASMA MEMBRANE CALCIUM ATPASE IN CORALS (Abstract ID: 29734)
The movement of molecules across cell membranes and epithelia is facilitated and energized by ion-transporting proteins such as ATPases and ion exchangers, co-transporters
and channels. We studied the cellular localization and physiological roles of some
ion-transporting proteins potentially involved in calcification, photosynthesis and pH
regulation in the corals Acropora yongei and Stylophora pistillata. The vacuolar proton
ATPase (VHA) was abundantly present in symbiosome membranes and participates in a
carbon concentrating mechanism for Symbiodinium photosynthesis. Additionally, VHA
was present in the coelenteron-facing membrane of aboral gastrodermal cells, suggesting it removes H+ away from the site of calcification. The Na+/K+-ATPase (NKA) was
abundantly present in the basolateral membrane of calicoblastic cells, indicating a role
oral ectodermal cells, suggesting a species-specific mechanism for taking up molecules
from seawater. Slc4 HCO3--transporters displayed a similar species-specific localization
pattern. Finally, a plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase (PMCA) was found throughout coral
tissues. Surprisingly, PMCA was not located in the plasma membrane of calicoblastic
cells, thus questioning the previously assumed role of PMCA in transporting Ca2+ into
the subcalicoblastic fluid. Knowledge on protein cellular localization and function can
greatly contribute to our understanding of coral cell biology, which in turn is essential for
studying and predicting coral responses to stress.

com

ASSESSMENT OF THE CURRENT STATUS OF CORALS AND ASSOCIATED
FAUNA OF SINDHUDURG COAST IN MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (Abstract ID: 29505)
Information on corals and associated fauna of Sindhudurg coast in India is not adequately known. Intertidal, subtidal and underwater surveys were conducted to ascertain
the presence of corals and associated fauna along the Sindhudurg coast of Maharashtra
in India for two years from November 2013 to November 2015. Permanent Monitoring Plots were established for health assessment of corals. Effect of anthropogenic
activities and factor influencing the distribution and abundance of corals and associates
along the Sindhudurg coast was also enumerated. Coral coverage was assessed through
conducted revealed >20 species of corals along Sindhudurg coast along with seven
new records among which Polycyathus verrilli Duncan, 1889, Goniopora minor, Pavona
bipartita Nemenzo, 1980 and Leptastrea purpurea (Dana, 1846) are unique records. The
sub-tidal/underwater surveys conducted also revealed several species of interesting
coral associated Fishes, Seahorse, Sponges, Gorgonians, Seafans, bivalves, Chiton, Opisthobranch, Brittle stars, Polychaete and Blue Button Jellyfish. There are anthropogenic
pressures viz. tourism, fishing etc. mounting on the ecosystem. This paper deals with assessment of corals and associated fauna of Sindhudurg coast, one of the important coral
reef ecosystems in the mainland west coasts of India along with conservation measures.


TERRESTRIAL SEDIMENT EFFECTS ON HAWAIIAN CORAL REEFS: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE (Abstract ID: 28950)
Long-term estimates of erosion rates on Hawaiian watersheds range from 0.01 to 0.1
mm/yr. In contrast, recent measurements shows erosion rates up to 10 mm/yr. One

349

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


3 days, before being exposed to corallivorous snailsDrupella for a prey preference assay.
The results indicated Hong Kong corals were generally tolerant to hypo-salinity stress
only around 5% of tissue loss. Drupella snails preferentially attacked corals exposed to
lower salinities. Additional Drupella prey-choice assays were conducted to assess the
relative vulnerability of these four coral species exposed at 18 psu (stressed) and 34
to 18 psu being the most preferred prey. These findings supported our hypothesis and
demonstrated that changes in salinity could alter the prey-preference of corallivores. This
could subsequently affect the composition of a coral community by removing the more
vulnerable species. This project is supported by RGC-GRF 14122215.

PRELIMINARY REA OF MYEIK (MERGUI) ARCHIPELAGO, MYANMAR (Abstract
ID: 29408)


Myanmar has a reported total coral reef area of 187,000ha, although they remain largely
unexplored and to a large extent, reefs in Myanmar have been assumed to be in similar
condition to hundreds of years ago, due to political and geographic isolation. However,
over the past few years, reports from tour operators suggested that the marine resources
of the Myeik Archipelago had been severely degraded. Between February 2014 and
March 2015, four survey voyages were undertaken and more than 100 sites were
surveyed by researchers under the auspices of IUCN and FFI along the 600km length
of the Archipelago. Here, we present a precis of data from those surveys. More than 280
species of hard coral, and 400 species of teleost fishes were observed, along with 73
species of echinoderms, more than 100 species of mollusc and 45 species of sponges.
The surveys found that – for the most part – the abundance of key reef infrastructure
species is generally low, and the overall condition of most coral reefs is either poor or
very poor. Reefs closer inshore varied widely in condition; where they were accessible
or easy to fish, the reefs were often badly degraded. Where conditions made fishing difficult, or where the fishermen were generally unaware of the reef habitat (usually, it would
seem, because of high turbidity and strong currents), reefs were often outstandingly
diverse and generally healthy. Biogeographic affiliations within the Myeik Archipelago
and eastern Indian Ocean are as yet unclear, although diversity and level of endemism
appear higher than in Thailand to the south.

OCTOCORAL COMMUNITY ECOLOGY AT TWO SITES OF CONTRASTING
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN ST JOHN, US VIRGIN ISLANDS (Abstract ID:
28888)
To better understand how octocoral communities on Caribbean coral reefs respond to
environmental conditions, we quantified their synecology on two reefs (9 m depth) with
contrasting physical conditions. One reef at Cabritte is exposed to easterly winds and
waves, while the other, in Europa Bay (1.4 km west) is partially sheltered and characterized by higher sedimentation. Octocoral population density was 2-fold higher at Cabritte
than Europa Bay, and the most abundant species (Antillogorgia americana, Gorgonia
ventalina, Eunicea flexuosa) were taller at Cabritte. Densities of octocoral recruits were
lower at Europa than Cabritte in winter, but similar at both sites in summer. Species
richness was similar between sites, with 34 species at Europa Bay, 35 at Cabritte, and
30 common to both sites. Multivariate analysis of species-specific abundance of adults
and recruits revealed that the two sites differed in octocoral community structure. The
large number of common species at the two sites suggests that these species have broad
ecological niches defined by a wide spectrum of environmental conditions. However,
their differences in colony sizes and relative abundances suggest that their populations
respond differently to the variation in environmental factors. In comparison to seminal
octocoral studies conducted in the Caribbean in the 1970’s, the species composition and
community structure of octocorals in St. John is similar, suggesting that recent reports
of increasing abundance of octocorals in the Caribbean reflect community range extensions and not novel communities.


DRIVERS OF RELATIVE SPECIES ABUNDANCES REGULATE THE DIVERSITYSTABILITY RELATIONSHIP OF CORAL REEF FISHES (Abstract ID: 28527 | Poster
ID: 215)


Fish communities are important for maintaining the stability of coral reef ecosystems.
higher species richness increases community stability), ensuring continued ecosystem
function despite environmental perturbations. Additionally, even when species richness
is constant, factors that drive relative species abundances can influence community
stability. However, little is known about how species richness and drivers of relative species abundances interact to regulate community stability in nature, particularly at spatial
scales comparable to the scale of marine reserves. Here, we used a fish community
time series dataset across a large spatial extent of the Great Barrier Reef to show that
(1) community stability increases with species richness, and (2) community stability
increases with the strength of niche-driven, more than stochastic-driven, variations in
relative species abundances. Moreover, species richness and drivers of relative species
abundances appear to influence stability through inter-specific asynchronous dynamics
and intra-specific population fluctuations, respectively. The two effects are not correlated, indicating that richness-related and relative abundance-related drivers of community
stability did not covary over the coral reef seascape. Our findings elucidate multiple
pathways of stability in reef fish communities. Spatial planning of large-scale marine
reserves should consider not only species diversity but also niche-forming mechanisms
if the goal is to sustain ecosystem stability.

IMPROVING CONSERVATION OUTCOMES FOR DATA-POOR CORAL REEFS
AFFECTED BY FUTURE OIL PALM DEVELOPMENT IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA
(Abstract ID: 28473)
Clearing forests for oil palm plantations is a major threat to tropical biodiversity, and may
coupled terrestrial and marine biophysical models to simulate changes in sediment/nutrient composition on reefs, and predict the response of coral and seagrass ecosystems
to different oil palm development scenarios. The condition of almost 60% of coastal
ecosystems were predicted to heavily degraded (more than a 50% decline from their
initial state) after 5 years if all suitable land was converted to oil palm. We evaluated the
benefits of using global sustainability criteria for oil palm plantations, and found only
slight improvements in ecosystem condition compared to the scenario where all forest
was converted to oil palm. More stringent restrictions are required to substantially lower
the risk of degradation; in particular limiting new plantings to hill slopes below 15 degrees. Evaluation of current plans for oil palm expansion identified ecosystems in marine
conservation priority areas that will likely be heavily degraded in the future. We show
marine conservation plans should be modified to prioritize turbid areas where coral
communities may be more tolerant of increased suspended sediment in the water. The
approach developed here provides guidelines for modifying marine conservation priorities in areas with oil palm development. Importantly, oil palm development guidelines
cannot be truly ecologically sustainable unless modified to account for oil palm impacts
on coastal marine ecosystems.


HIGH TOLERANCE OF CORALS FROM MARGINAL ENVIRONMENT IN HONG
KONG TO HYPOSALINITY AND PREFERENCE OF CORALLIVORY ON OSMOTIC-STRESSED CORALS (Abstract ID: 29475 | Poster ID: 304)
Interactive effects of environmental variables could affect the health of coral colonies
which are reported to be sensitive to fluctuation in seawater salinity. We hypothesize that
the osmotic-stressed corals may subsequently become more prone to other disturbances
like corallivory. This hypothesis was tested with a series of laboratory-based experiments set up to determine the osmotic tolerances of four coral species (Acropora valida,
Pavona decussata, Platygyra acuta and Porites lobata) found in the marginal community in
Hong Kong. These corals were first treated separately at 9, 12, 15, 18, 24 and 34 psu for
350

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



PIGMENTED PSEUDOALTEROMONAS SPECIES CAN PROTECT CORAL MONTIPORA CAPITATA FROM INFECTION BY THE PATHOGEN VIBRIO CORALLIILYTICUS STRAIN OCN008 (Abstract ID: 29242 | Poster ID: 136)

HOW INVASIVE INDO-PACIFIC RED LIONFISH INTERACT WITH FISH PARASITES AND CLEANING MUTUALISMS NATIVE TO ATLANTIC CORAL REEFS
(Abstract ID: 29030)

Coral reefs are among the most diverse and productive ecosystems in the ocean and are
threatened by a number of bacterial infections. Vibrio coralliilyticus OCN008 is a bacterium that
induces acute Montipora White Syndrome (aMWS), a tissue-loss disease affecting Montipora
capitata, a major reef-building coral in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii. The bacteria that colonize the
coral surface are hypothesized to protect against bacterial pathogens like OCN008. Two
to OCN008, the infection rate was reduced by 60% and 100%, respectively. Neither of the
OCN008 infection through the production of antibacterial compounds. Therefore, a genetic
screen was developed to determine what compound(s) are produced by these bacteria and if
antibacterial activity is involved with protection of the coral. This is the first in vivo evidence to
show how bacteria of the coral microflora can protect the host from infection.

What makes invasive species successful, and how do they alter native populations and
communities? We addressed these key questions within the context of the invasion
of Atlantic coral reefs by Indo-Pacific red lionfish (Pterois volitans). To assess the role
of parasites in this invasion, we compared infection rates of lionfish with sympatric
carnivorous fishes at multiple locations in their invasive and native ranges. We found that
invasive Atlantic lionfish had extremely few parasites when compared both to native
Pacific lionfish and to native Atlantic fishes. Such “enemy release” may help to explain
this successful invasion if lionfish consequently allocate more energy to growth and
reproduction than to costly immune defenses. With few parasites to limit them, lionfish
may consume ecologically important species, including cleaning gobies (Elacatinus
spp.): ubiquitous, conspicuous fishes that clean parasites off other reef fishes. However,
while lionfish will eat cleaning gobies during laboratory and field experiments, they
quickly learn to avoid them, due to a previously undescribed skin toxin in these gobies.
Additional field experiments revealed no change in the growth, survival, and behavior
of lionfish. Thus, cleaning gobies are among the few inhabitants of invaded reefs that
escape the jaws of lionfish. Given their broad and voracious appetites, however, invasive
lionfish will continue to affect native reef communities via predation on other ecologically important fishes.



SUPER TYPHOON HAIYAN: INUNDATION, EROSION AND GROUNDWATER
RECOVERY: KAYANGEL STATE, REPUBLIC OF PALAU (Abstract ID: 28262 | Poster
ID: 393)
On November 06-07 2013, Super typhoon Haiyan passed directly over Kayangel Atoll in
the northern area of Palau. The storm generated massive waves in the atoll’s northeast
through southeast quadrants and severely damaged reefs on the outer slope on the
northern and eastern exposures. The waves eroded areas of the eastern shores of the
islands, caused changes in the sand banks and flats within the lagoon, but left western
to southwestern outer reefs and lagoon seagrass and patch reef communities largely
untouched. Salt water intrusion from inundation and salt spray contaminated the fresh
water lens of Kayangel Island. The impact of salt water intrusion and the recovery
of the fresh water lens were examined in the year following the storm. The relations
between lagoon and island ground water lenses were concluded using pressure loggers
while salinity/depth of the island ground water lens was measured using hand-held
water quality monitors. Aerial photographs before, immediately after and continuing to
the present were used to examine inundation zones and recovery of vegetation on the
islands. Ground truth surveys were used to validate interpretation of aerial images. At
the nearby Ngeruangel/Velasco reef sunken atoll system the single island (Ngeruangel)
was swept clean by the storm waves. The island grew slightly in size and elevation and
migrated about 50 m distance from the storm. Marine communities on Velasco Reef
were severely affected with massive shifting of sediments and erosion of the unusual
Thalassodendron ciliatum beds found on the sunken atoll rim.

ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION OF THE SYMBIODINIUM PROTEOME (Abstract ID: 29207)
The vast genetic diversity of Symbiodinium denotes a great adaptability to different
environments. Genome sequencing has been used to unveil differences in the physiological machinery to explain different adaptations. However, environmental regulation of
acclimation pathways including, photochemistry and photoprotection for Symbiodinium
appear to be governed post-translationally and thus undetectable via transcriptomics.
Proteomics therefore provides an extremely powerful platform to support the increasing use of transcriptomics to understand the physiological ‘wiring’ adapted among
Symbiodinium to thrive across different environments. Therefore we contrasted the
changes in the proteome among Symbiodinium species in culture (ITS2 types A1, A13
and C1) with known differences in stress tolerance and life history (“mutualists” versus
“parasites”), and how their proteomes are further modified at different growth light
(photonflux:100/350µmol•m2•s-1) and temperature (26/30°C) as well as at thermal
stress (33°C). Using 2D-PAGE and LC/MS-MS proteomics we observed differential
regulation between clades of chloroplast precursors, structural motifs, transcriptional
regulators and heat shock proteins. These results in addition with characterization of
growth rates and photo-physiological traits provide new insight into how emergent physiological trait expression is underpinned by complex re-organisation of the proteome;
consequently, new understanding of the pathways at play that regulate Symbiodinium
competitive fitness under both steady state and anomalously stressful conditions.




The United States is the world’s largest consumer of coral reef fishes for aquariums
with upwards of 11 million fish imported annually. The largest exporters of marine
aquarium fish (MAF) are the Philippines and Indonesia, both of which are known for the
widespread use of cyanide (CN−) in MAF capture. CN− is metabolized into thiocyanate
(SCN−), and fish exposed to CN− excrete SCN− in their urine for at least 28 days post
exposure. The detection of elevated levels of SCN− in seawater that held MAF indicates
held individual MAF specimens in synthetic seawater for 24 hours and utilized HighPerformance Liquid Chromatography with ultraviolet detector (HPLC-UV) to screen for
SCN− in the holding water. SCN− was detected in a significant number of samples. No
SCN− was detected in holding water that contained control specimens obtained from
captive breeding facilities. This study shows that detection of SCN− in holding water is

THE ROLE OF PATHOGENS, PROBIOTICS, AND THE BACTERIAL MICROFLORA
IN ACUTE MONTIPORA WHITE SYNDROME (Abstract ID: 28517)
Tissue loss diseases destroy coral and can lead to colony mortality, which exacerbates
the deteriorating state of the world’s reefs. To defend against pathogens, the bacteria
colonizing the coral, termed the normal microflora, are thought to protect the coral
host through competition for nutrients and space or the production of antibacterial
tissue loss in the reef-building coral Montipora capitata and produces the antibiotic an351

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

developed tissue loss, however, a mutant strain incapable of producing andrimid
antibiotics that cleared the microflora allowed the mutant strain to infect at wild-type
levels, implicating andrimid in mitigation of the protective effects of the coral microflora.
effect, alteration of the coral microflora, is required for optimal infection and demonstration of a probiotic effect from bacteria of the coral microflora provides in vivo evidence
for competitive antibacterial production between pathogens and the normal microflora.

PROTECTING CORALS UNDER THE ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT CAN PROMOTE CORAL REEF RECOVERY (Abstract ID: 28940)
Reef-building corals are dying at accelerated pace due to climate change and other
anthropogenic threats, resulting in negative effects for ecosystem function and services.
Although the science on the causes and consequences of coral loss is comprehensive,
conservation actions have been largely insufficient to actively reverse coral decline.
protection laws, has prevented the extinction of 99 percent of species under its care and
has effectively promoted recovery. Currently, 22 coral species are listed as threatened
under the ESA with seven species in the Atlantic Ocean and 15 in the Pacific Ocean.
We discuss how the ESA works, the tools it provides to conserve threatened corals and
how protection can ultimately promote coral reef recovery. ESA protection requires the
development of recovery plans that provide coordination, evaluation, and funding for
coral conservation and new research. It leads to the protection of critical habitat areas
to corals and their critical habitat from government-approved activities including dredging, commercial fishing, construction, and projects emitting significant greenhouse gas
emissions that contribute to warming. ESA protection also promotes greater awareness
about threats to corals and public engagement in coral conservation. These protections
can result in ecosystem-wide benefits by improving water quality, reducing pollution, and
restoring degraded ecosystems.


GENETIC LARVAL IDENTIFICATION AND QUANTIFICATION AS NEW TOOLS
TO INVESTIGATE EXTEND AND CAUSES OF CROWN-OF-THORNS OUTBREAKS
(Abstract ID: 28604)
Predation by Crown-of-Thorns Seastars (CoTS) is a major contributor to the coral reef
decline in the Indo-Pacific Region. Testing hypotheses about CoTS outbreaks is hampered by our inability to investigate distribution of larvae because they resemble other
asteroid and some holothuroid larvae. We developed several genetic markers and tested
these on plankton samples in outbreak areas of the northern Great Barrier Reef (GBR),
and in Okinawa, Japan. The method was verified through microscopy and amplification
of single wild and cultured larvae. Most samples collected during the spawning season
on the GBR contained CoTS larvae, suggesting very high larval numbers in the plankton.
Larvae were also identified in several samples in Okinawa. During the spawning season
In Japan, several early larvae were identified near Miyako Island and dense population
of later stages were found near Sekisei Lagoon. A newly developed rtPCR assay reliably
quantified gene copy numbers over 7 orders of magnitude. We now started monitoring to quantify larvae to test several aspects of their ecology. These studies include
a) resolving the exact spawning times by temporal studies over the spawning season,
and b) spatial quantification (small scale vertical and large scale horizontal) in relation
to water quality parameters to further test the ‘nutrient hypothesis’. The latter work is
complemented by studies on the role of food quantity and quality and the effect of other
environmental variables on larval development and survivorship.


SIZE FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF PORITES CYLINDRICA IN AN OFFSHORE PHILIPPINE REEF (Abstract ID: 29869 | Poster ID: 657)
Life-history processes provide crucial information on reef responses to prevailing
environmental conditions that are crucial in reef health studies and their implications
to marine resource management. This study was conducted to provide species-specific
information on the population dynamics of Porites cylindrica, a common coral species
in an off-shore marine sanctuary in the Zamboanga peninsula, Philippines. It aims to
track changes in size frequency distribution (SFD), mortality and growth patterns of
2015). Fifty one 1m x 1m quadrats in three (3) sites (n= 153) at 10-12m depth located
around the island were photographed annually. Site 1 being the most exposed to land
based sedimentation and 3 being the farthest. The cover, density and size structure of
haphazardly chosen colonies were in situ photographed, tagged and measured for growth
3 compared to site 1. These results may serve as a benchmark indicator for coral reef
health during marine sanctuary monitoring for upcoming disturbances and may give

Republic of Iran
Republic of Iran
Islamic Republic of Iran
Republic of Iran


SEASONAL VARIATION IN, AND PROJECTED EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE
ON, CALCIFICATION RATES OF ACROPORA DOWNINGI IN THE NORTHEASTERN PERSIAN GULF (Abstract ID: 29188 | Poster ID: 316)

STABILITY AND FUNCTIONALITY OF THE MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES ASSOCIATED WITH TEMPERATE GORGONIANS AND THE PRECIOUS RED CORAL
CORALLIUM RUBRUM (Abstract ID: 29288)

With on-going climate change, there is a strong interest in understanding how changes in
environmental conditions will impact on coral growth and thereby, reef accretion. In this
study, we explore seasonal variation in in-situ calcification rates of Acropora downingi in
greatly among seasons and had a significant, but non-linear, relationship with temperature
(r2 = 0.30) and a significant linear relationship with irradiance (r2 = 0.36). There was not,
however, any apparent effect of Ωarag on intra-annual variation in calcification (r2 = 0.02).
Differences in calcification were largely attributable (~ 57.4%) to seasonal differences in irradiance, while temperature accounted 37% of intra-annual variation in calcification, largely
constraining coral growth in warmer months. As such, we predict that ocean warming will
lead to declines in calcification during spring, fall, and especially summer, though possibly
enhancing calcification during the winter months. Overall, there is likely to be a net decline
were very similar to that reported for other corals in subtropical locations. As such, we
suggest that ongoing climate change (and specifically, ocean warming) will have generally
negative effects on coral growth, even at subtropical locations.

Gorgonians are key habitat-forming species of temperate benthic communities.
However, local human impacts and mass mortality events caused by elevated seawater
temperatures related to climate change and microbial disease outbreaks are responsible
for significant declines in gorgonian populations. Despite these threats, relatively little
is known about the symbioses between gorgonian hosts and their microbial associates.
While Endozoicomonas from the order Oceanospirillales are commonly associated with
most anthozoans (up to 95%), we report that the microbiome of Corallium rubrum is
dominated by Spirochaetes (70%) and to a lesser extent Oceanospirillales of the ME2
family (25%). This core microbiome, consisting of 12 bacterial species, was found to
be highly stable on both spatial and temporal scales, suggesting that these bacteria
are important symbionts of the red coral. In contrast, the Endozoicomonas-dominated
microbiomes of other temperate gorgonians were found to undergo significant changes
depending on local conditions. To elucidate the function of these divergent gorgonianassociated microbial communities and the effects elevated seawater temperatures,
ocean acidification and eutrophication may have on their functionality, we conducted
352

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

onset is 2043. Locations projected to experience ASB after 2052 and before 2034 are
relative climate winners and losers, respectively. There are relative climate winners and
losers in 16 of the top 20 countries in terms of reef area. Among these, Cuba (11.3%)
and Australia (8%) have the highest percentages of relative climate winners. Coral reef
futures clearly vary greatly among and within countries. Emissions scenario RCP4.5 represents lower emissions mid-century than will eventuate if pledges made following the
2015 Paris Climate Change Conference (COP21) become reality. RCP4.5 adds ~15 years
on average before ASB occurs when compared to RCP8.5; however, >75% of reefs still
experience ASB before 2070 under RCP4.5.

meta-transcriptomic analyses on gorgonians and the red coral impacted by these
stressors in experimental settings. We will present results from these studies showing a
novel microbial symbiotic association within Anthozoans and how stress may impact the
health of the coral holobiont through the disruptions of host-microbial symbioses.

THE FIGHT AGAINST FINNING: WHO IS WINNING THE WAR? (Abstract ID:
27857)
Despite the current protection efforts as well as the introduction of more stringent laws
regulating the hunting and trading of sharks (especially their fins), shark conservation
is still recognized a major environmental challenge. The rapid growth in the demand
for raw dried shark fins has led to a global exploitation of many elasmobranch species.
Recent studies have also confirmed that the United Arab Emirates (UAE) is being used
as an export hub and is currently the fourth largest exporter of shark fins to Hong Kong,
with a large proportion of fins traded considered to be from species at high risk of global
extinction (based on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red
List of Threatened Species)). Current management frameworks still reveal significant
deficiencies with regard to legal protection of elasmobranchs, specifically associated
with fishing methods and monitoring of finning practices. These problems however are
not unique to the UAE but reiterate the facts that there are far-reaching issues pertaining
the global management and protection of shark species. Even in a realm of improving
conservation efforts, the current data on the success of shark finning prohibition might
be mendacious when viewed in the light of looming species extinction. This paper therefore considers the regional regulatory framework that seeks to enhance shark protection
and conservation.


REEFGUARD: AN INDUSTRY LED APPROACH TO ASSISTED REEF REHABILITATION WITH ‘LAB’-CULTURED JUVENILE CORALS OBTAINED FROM NATURAL
CORAL SPAWNING EVENTS (Abstract ID: 28713)
In 2010, Dutch dredging and marine contractor Van Oord launched a Coral Rehabilitation Initiative (2010 – 2015). Its aim is to enhance the assisted rehabilitation of
degraded natural coral reefs by out-planting (tens to ultimately hundreds of thousands)
‘lab’-cultured juvenile corals obtained from natural coral spawning events. A key challenge is to demonstrate that already proven small-scale coral breeding techniques can
be scaled-up and applied in the field to promote environmental gain around marine infrastructure projects. An innovative mobile laboratory, named ReefGuard, was developed
to ensure the availability of a controlled environment to facilitate fertilisation, primary
settling and initial outgrowing of the larvae before outplacement. After its construction in
2013, ReefGuard was applied in three field trials. The first two trials were executed near
Ningaloo Reef in Coral Bay Australia (2014 and 2015). The third trial was executed in
Coral Harbour on New Providence, Bahamas (2015). The trials involved three species
of acropora corals, in-situ as well as ex-situ gamete collection, and employed 10.000,
36.000 and 20.000 settlement tiles respectively. Tiles with settled larvae were placed
in the field as part of a scientific survival experiment. The results that are going to be
presented include the design of the ReefGuard, its use in up-scaling consecutive breeding steps, the settlement and mortality rates encountered and a number of practical
aspects that are crucial in bringing this technology towards operating standards that are
acceptable to industry.


INCREASED TEMPERATURE IS THE DOMINANT DRIVER OF CLIMATE
CHANGE IMPACTS ON ACROPORA FORMOSA (Abstract ID: 29173)
Increased seawater temperatures and ocean acidification due to rising CO2emissions
have serious impacts on coral reef ecosystems, although a full understanding remains
elusive due to the large number of non-manipulative, correlative studies. Our experiment investigated the physiological and metabolic performance of the symbiotic coral
Acropora formosa under temperature and pCO2 conditions (both as individual factors and
as combined treatments) expected by the end of this century under business-as-usual
emissions. After eleven weeks of exposure to increased pCO2 concentrations alone,
no significant changes were observed in productivity, net growth and calcification rates
(measured using the alkalinity anomaly technique), and survival rates compared to the
control treatment. However, when exposed to increased temperatures whether or not
in combination with increased pCO2, Acropora formosa responded with a sharp decline
in productivity. Over time, these changes produced a net negative energetic budget,
extensive mortality. Our results indicate that temperature is the dominant factor in reducing growth and metabolism of Acropora formosa under future climatic conditions.



THE DIVERSITY AND ROLES OF CORAL-ASSOCIATED VIRUSES (Abstract ID:
27822)
The cellular microorganisms associated with corals are known to confer benefits to
their host by various mechanisms, including photosynthesis, nitrogen fixation, enhancing
calcification and infection prevention. Conversely, under conditions of environmental
stress, certain microorganisms cause coral bleaching and disease. Stress responses
and tolerance limits of corals are the result of complex interactions with their various
symbionts, but the extent to which each member contributes to a particular trait is poorly
understood. The viruses associated with corals have received little attention, and their
diversity and functions in the ecology and evolution of corals are virtually unknown.
We have started to explore the diversity of coral-associated viruses in a range of coral
species on the Great Barrier Reef (GBR), in healthy and diseased/bleached coral tissues, and in laboratory cultures of Symbiodinium isolated from coral. Our results show
that the viral assemblages of corals are highly diverse. GBR Symbiodinium cultures are
targeted by three groups of viruses; a retrovirus-like virus of filamentous morphology, a
virus with genetic similarities to a ssRNA virus known to infect free-living dinoflagellates
and with an icosahedral morphology, and a large dsDNA virus also of icosahedral morphology. We found evidence for regulation of viral genes during a laboratory heat stress
experiment on cultured Symbiodinium. I will discuss the diversity of GBR coral and

DOWNSCALED PROJECTIONS OF CORAL BLEACHING CONDITIONS THAT
CAN INFORM CONSERVATION PLANNING (Abstract ID: 29484)
Increasingly frequent severe coral bleaching is among the greatest threats to coral reefs
posed by climate change. Global climate models (GCMs) project great spatial variation
in the timing of annual severe bleaching (ASB) conditions; a point at which reefs are
certain to change and recovery will be limited. However, previous model-resolution
projections (~1x1°) are too coarse to inform conservation planning. To meet the need
for higher-resolution projections, we generated statistically downscaled projections (4-km
Timing of ASB varies >10 years in 71 of the 87 countries and territories with >500km2
of reef area, indicating the projections warrant consideration in most reef areas during
conservation and management planning. The global average projected timing for ASB

353

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

tinct contrast in resilience dynamics. Florida and Curacao populations each weathered
severe storms during the study period and the dynamics exhibited during the calm years
-- 2%/y growth in Florida where severe storms are relatively frequent versus 4% /y decline in Curacao where severe storms are infrequent -- were fundamentally different from
each other, suggesting that populations have varying degrees of resilience to storms.
Characterizing Acropora palmatadynamics across space can help us design locationspecific management criteria -- although the conservation goals (increase abundance
and extent) may be common, techniques and expected outcomes should be different.

Symbiodinium viruses and new insights gleaned into the roles that viruses play in corals.


FISHERY MANAGEMENT IN A RISKY AND UNSTABLE ENVIRONMENT: A
SPATIAL MODELING APPROACH APPLIED TO THE GIANT CLAM TRIDACNA
MAXIMA IN FRENCH POLYNESIA (Abstract ID: 28078 | Poster ID: 620)
The giant clam Tridacna maxima has been largely overexploited in many tropical regions over the past decades, and was therefore listed in appendix II of the Convention of
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) in 1985. In French Polynesia, several
atolls harbor the world’s highest stocks of giant clams in very shallow and accessible
areas, but massive (natural) mortality events also occurred in some semi-closed atolls
of Tuamotu’s archipelago. These natural fluctuations of stocks complicate management
recommendations. Here, we report on the use of a spatially explicit population dynamics
model applied for one atoll (Tatakoto, Tuamotu’s archipelago) affected by both fishing
pressure and natural mortality events. Giant clam abundances, growth, mortality, recruitment, and fishing effort were estimated in situ and used to design a network of spatial
planning units following an integrated approach. The spatially explicit population model
and evaluated the best management strategies to optimize future stocks. In the risky and
uncertain environment of Tatakoto atoll lagoon, abundances were a trade-off between
recruitment and high mortality. Our results suggested that fishing effort had low impact
on giant clam abundance compared to the natural fluctuation of stocks, but reducing
fishing pressure through quotas was the most efficient management tool to increase resilience and accelerate the recovery of stocks after a massive mortality event.

DETERMINING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF WATERSHED MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES TO REDUCE LAND-BASED POLLUTION ON WEST MAUI (Abstract ID:
28118)
As an approach to reduce the effects of land-based sources of pollution on coral reefs,
West Maui as one of two Pacific Region priority areas for the implementation of the
Ridge-to-Reef management initiative. There are five priority watersheds in West Maui:
Wahikuli, Honokowai, Kahana, Honokohua, and Honolua. This study summarizes work
completed to establish a baseline against which to assess the effectiveness of future
upland management activities aimed at reducing sedimentation stress to the adjacent
coral reefs. Permanent, replicate coral community monitoring transects were established
adjacent to seven drainages within the five priority watersheds. Benthic reef community
structure and coral population demographic parameters, including percent cover, coral
colony density, size class structure, and health condition data were collected. In addition,
terrestrial sediment loading was evaluated by turbidity, sediment composition, and
sediment accumulation data at a subset of sites. While this baseline assessment provides
a framework to assess change over time, it also underpins the wide range in the overall
health status and condition among adjacent coral communities in relation to land use, in
addition to highlighting data and informational gaps. This information is a pivotal component of the watershed characterization process as it helps support decision-making
regarding watershed restoration efforts aimed at reducing land-based pollution impacts
to high-priority reefs.


DEVELOPING COST EFFECTIVE METHODS FOR QUANTIFYING THE HABITAT
BENEFIT OF WATERSHED RESTORATION (Abstract ID: 29440)


Since 2011, NOAA has funded watershed restoration projects on Culebra Island, Puerto
Rico to reduce land‐based sources of pollution (LBSP) discharged to coral reef habitats.
However, due to budgetary constraints, performance based monitoring has generally
been limited. NOAA’s Restoration Center, in coordination with other NOAA line offices
and independent scientists, developed a cost-effective multi-spatial and multi-temporal
monitoring protocol to evaluate the performance of the LBSP management actions,
inform adaptive management strategies, and better understand linkages of management
actions to coastal habitat health. In 2014, monitoring was initiated to test this protocol
and includes: crude modeling of pre- and post-restoration sediment loads, studies to
quantify the sediment mass reduction at the management practices, establishing baseline
metrics of nearshore water quality, seagrass health, and coral health. Preliminary results
indicate that watershed restoration projects reduce sediment loads by 85% at-the-practice. Baseline nearshore water quality is dynamic, yet mean annual turbidity, water clarity,
and chlorophyll a are correlated to known LBSP impairments. Furthermore, water quality indicators are correlated to metrics of seagrass and coral reef health. Comparisons
of these results to similar watershed scale studies suggest that investments in low-cost
long-term water quality and habitat quality monitoring could provide a cost-effective
approach to evaluating linkages between LBSP management and coral reef health.

A MORPHO-FUNCTIONAL APPROACH IN CORALLINE ALGAE (RHODOPHYTA)
TO UNDERSTAND NICHE PARTITIONING AND THEIR DIFFERENTIAL SENSITIVITY TO GLOBAL CHANGE (Abstract ID: 29512 | Poster ID: 282)
The capacity and efficiency of the photosynthetic tissue to absorb light are two key
