provide abundant fishery resources for small-scale fisheries, but also an additional source
income for fishers who operate recreational tourism. Maintaining coral reef health could
be an important concern to ensure sustainability of their livelihoods. In this study, semistructured surveys and focus group meetings were conducted to understand the perception of small-scale fishers on importance of coral reefs and their efforts on coral reefs
conservation in Ko Samui and Ko Chang, the famous tourism destinations located in the
western and the eastern Gulf of Thailand. Although the islands have been influenced
with tourism development, small-scale fisheries are still existent. Most of the fishers realized that coral reefs are important for sustaining their livelihoods as their primary sources
of food production. Besides, during tourism season, they also gain benefits from tourismrelated activities such as providing boats for tourists to diving or fishing sites. They all
agreed that coral reefs should be conserved and sustainably utilized. Consequently, many
environmental conservation activities have been initiated by local communities attempting to protect coral reefs such as reef cleanup activities, coral reef monitoring volunteers
etc. This study could illustrate perception and some efforts of small-scale fishers that
enhance abundance of fishery resources and coral reef ecosystem balance.

MECHANISM OF ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OFGONIOPORA STOKESI
POPULATION AROUND OKINAWA, JAPAN (Abstract ID: 28637 | Poster ID: 180)
Goniopora stokesi is widely distributed in tropical and subtropical regions throughout the
world. This species is commonly found free-living on soft substrates and makes dense
populations in isolated environment, probably due to its characteristic manner of asexual
reproduction: daughter colonies are formed on the surface of the parent colony and later
was found at 30 m depth in Oura Bay in Okinawa Island. This study investigated the
population dynamics, its genetic population structure, reproductive strategy and the
quadrats did not increase, while daughter colonies were produced year round. On the
other hand, this species was gonochoric and spawned gametes in late August to early
September in Okinawa Island. An analysis of the ITS region of rDNA indicated that the
colonies sampled from this population were not clonemates but exhibited no gene flow
from another population in Okinawa. These results suggested that this population was
maintained via not only asexual reproduction but also sexual one within the population. The growth rates of daughter colonies were similar to those reported for other
poritidae species, while the colony size at sexual maturity was smaller than others. These
reproductive traits of this species may be effective in establishing and maintaining its
population in unstable environment.


A TURNAROUND AT SANYA NATIONAL CORAL REEF NATURE RESERVE?
(Abstract ID: 28163 | Poster ID: 703)


Located in the South China Sea, Sanya, Hainan province, is China’s only seaside tropic
resort city where 13 million tourists visited annually. While Sanya’s GDP rose by tenfold
over a decade, such unprecedented growth also brought pollution, habitat destruction

REGIONAL-SCALE EROSION OF MODERN CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract
ID: 28778)

381

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

and other stresses that overwhelm its coral reefs. Since 1980s, researchers noted a
plummet of coral coverage from 80 to 12%, with significant declines in distribution and
diversity as well. While the central government tried to control such damages through
legislation, its ability to influence policy implementation was limited. At the local level,
performance of city and provincial government officials was measured by GDP growth
and their ability to meet job and tax revenue targets. Hence, enforcement of protection
laws was not a priority, even in marine reserves. Recently, however, research and monitoring have gained traction, media reports become less censored, and government priorities have shifted to include environmental protection. Public awareness has increased,
and the authorities seem to recognize that conservation is not just good governance, but
also good business practice. Summarized here are China’s recent efforts in managing
the Sanya National Coral Reef Nature Reserve, its only national-level MPA dedicated
to coral reef conservation. Through literature research and interviews, we examine the
roles played by scientists, journalists and government officials, and how science informs
policy making and management. A turnaround is perhaps underway due to renewed
prioritization from the central government.


ASSESSING MPA EFFECTIVENESS USING ECOLOGICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC INDICATORS IN PHILIPPINE COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 29220)
The establishment of MPAs in the Philippines has proliferated and has been shown to
allow for the recovery of declining coral reef conditions. While this growth of MPAs can
be an indication of potential benefits, other studies have showed that many MPAs in
the country are not so effective. These concerns highlight the need to better understand
processes and standards that go into establishing MPAs, if and how these lead to social
and ecological benefits for the community and the MPA, and potential feedbacks. This
study used a socio-economic assessment tool (SEAT) and an MPA Effectiveness Assessment Tool (MEAT) to look at the interplay between investments, processes and benefits
for various MPA sites. MEAT gauges governance levels in the study sites, while SEAT
incorporates resource valuation considerations and livelihood parameters to evaluate
benefits derived from effective management. General Additive Mixed Models were used
to gauge associations between inputs and outputs from MPA development activities.
Investments into MPA establishment were correlated to enhanced productivity of reefs
indicator that the MPA translates to increased incomes and employment appears to be
the level of revenues garnered by the MPA itself followed by the condition of the management plan. Interestingly, these relationships are non-linear, potentially reflecting the
complex political aspects underlying the system. The relations and thresholds between
ecological-socio-economic indicators are further explored


CURRENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS OF CORAL REEF FISHERIES IN
THE SOUTH CHINA SEA (Abstract ID: 28091)
We investigate future economic and ecological trajectories of reef fisheries in the South
China Sea (SCS) under combined management and climate change scenarios. We first
integrate existing data to assess the current social, economic, and ecological status of
SCS reef fisheries. Secondly, we use an ecosystem model to investigate how scenarios of
fisheries management and climate change will affect reef fish catch and biomass in the
future ( 2045). SCS artisanal and subsistence reef catch was approximately 1.1 million
t in 2010, supporting the livelihoods of up to an estimated 3.2 million reef fishers, and
providing food for up to approximately 32 million people. Under a scenario of low greenhouse gas emissions and sustainable fisheries management, reef fisheries catch was
projected to increase by 20% by 2045 relative to 2015, and by 40% under a status quo
management scenario (no new fishing restrictions) and high emissions. The projected
number of reef fishers across SCS countries in 2045 can potentially catch 35% and 16%
more per fisher under a status quo and sustainable management scenario, respectively.
However, the increased catch under a status quo scenario comes at the expense of a
large loss in top predators from the reef. Based on these projections, we will analyze the
social and economic implications on reef fisheries dependent communities. By assessing
the ecological and societal trade-offs associated with potential futures, this study helps
to identify what alternative policy pathways SCS countries can take now to progress
towards socio-ecologically resilient coral reef fisheries in the long-term.


CORAL DISTRIBUTION MAPPING OF OKINOTORISHIMA USING TIME-SERIES
This study was aimed to understand recent coral distribution and their secular changes
at Okinotorishima, Tokyo, JAPAN, by utilizing high resolution satellite imagery. Imaginary
taken in 2006, 2011, and 2012 were used in this study. For the analytical method of the
imagery from 2006, a coral coverage distribution map was made, after clustering using
satellite imagery, by superimposing each cluster on existing coverage distribution map
made around the same time. For imagery from the rest of the years, the coverage was
given automatically according to the relationship between data of each cluster and its
coral coverage based on the analysis of 2006. The accuracy of the analysis was verified
in comparison with the result of the field survey. It was revealed that the accuracy of the
coral coverage was within around ±4~5% from the analyzed value and the one of the
coverage change was within around ±5%.


GENOME-WIDE DNA METHYLATION PROFILING REVEALED COMPLEX ROLES
IN ACROPORA MILLEPORA (Abstract ID: 28995)
Eukaryotic cytosine methylation is an ancient trait present in both animals and plants.
However, knowledge about DNA methylation in corals is still in its infancy. We show
that the coral Acropora millepora has a typical animal gene methylation machinery.
We performed bisulphite sequencing and found that DNA methylation only occur at
CpG dinucleotides. CpG methylation exhibits similar patterns as in other animals and
plants, such as cluster of methylated cytosines and symmetric methylation from both
strands, but variations among features were also evident. We confirm the preference
of DNA methylation in ubiquitously expressed genes, but also observed complete
promoter methylation from a subset of inactive genes that indicates a repressive role on
gene expression. In spite of the higher mutability of methylated sites, a comparison of
codons were overrepresented at the first codon position (CGN codon) suggesting strong
probably due to their high transposon content, while transposons outside of introns are
less methylated. Our results support multiple functions of DNA methylation in coral
genomes, which will lead to a deeper understanding of the complex relationships among
DNA methylation, transcription plasticity and transposon silencing.


OBSERVING CHANGES IN CARBONATE CHEMISTRY ON CORAL REEFS
ACROSS THE PACIFIC (Abstract ID: 28837 | Poster ID: 376)
Many coral reef scientists are researching how ocean acidification is changing seawater
chemistry and affecting coral reef ecology. Most research is conducted at limited
spatial and temporal scales. In 2005, the Coral Reef Ecosystem Program (CREP)
began analyzing seawater samples for dissolved inorganic carbon and total alkalinity to
assess changing carbonate chemistry across the Pacific. Since 2013, in concert with an
additional suite of oceanographic instrumentation, these two analytes have continued
to be collected by CREP at 49 coral reef sites as part of NOAA’s National Coral Reef
Monitoring Program. CREP’s ocean acidification measurements span a spectrum of
present long-term nearshore, near-reef, and 1 km offshore water chemistry data to reveal
differences between islands and elucidate the importance of oceanographic processes

382

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

pH7.5 at 11d-28d, pH8.1 and pH7.8 at 15d-21d, and pH7.8 and pH7.5 at 15d-28d. The
reference transcriptome consisted of 64556 contigs with mean size of 914 bases and
N50 of 1612 bases. We have found 50097 total genes, and 2529 were identified on the
ontology analysis indicated that the transcription of genes associated with the terms of
biological process, cellular component and molecular function. According to the analysis
using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomics (KEGG) database, we identified
22 important genes which were involved in major Organismal Systems, such as mineral
absorption, endocrine and other factor regulated calcium reabsorption, vasopressin
regulated water reabsorption, proximal tubule bicarbonate reclamation, osteoclast differentiation, gastric acid secretion, etc.

Additionally, we will present diurnal water sample data, supported with high-resolution
instrument records for reefs in the central, equatorial, and South Pacific. Both of these
to calculate reef-level net ecosystem calcification (NEC) and net ecosystem production
(NEP) rates. These rates are variable across the Pacific, serve as useful indicators of
coral reef ecosystem health, and establish novel datasets for the islands and atolls CREP
monitors.


VERTICAL PROFILES OF CALCIUM AND PH IN THE CORAL GASTRIC CAVITY:
IMPLICATIONS FOR OCEAN ACIDIFICATION (Abstract ID: 28522)

KAI KULEANA KAKOU - UNITING TO CARE FOR WEST HAWAII’S COASTAL
AND MARINE COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 29912 | Poster ID: 687)

One hypothesis to explain reductions in coral calcification rates caused by ocean
acidification is that elevated seawater CO2 results in increased transport of CO2 into
the calcifying fluid, acidifying the fluid and reducing calcification. A major route through
which CO2 may enter the calcifying fluid is through the coelenteron or gastric cavity. It is
therefore important to understand the processes controlling coelenteron pH, which may
partially affect the response of corals to ocean acidification. In this study, pH and Ca2+
microsensors were combined with a reaction-diffusion model to study the dynamics of
pH and Ca2+ in the coelenteron of the reef corals Turbinaria reniformis and Acropora
millepora. Our study showed that Ca2+ concentrations linearly decreased from the
mouth to the base of coelenteron due to calcification. Based on these profiles, instantaneous calcification rates could be estimated, but lower than the rates derived by buoyant
weight measurements. In contrast, the H+ concentration remained relatively constant
over much of the coelenteron cavity before it increased sharply towards the base of the
coelenteron, indicative of proton-pumping from the calcification fluid below. The resulting H+ gradient between the coelenteron cavity and the calcification site was >10 times
higher than previously predicted. Consequently, the energy required to export protons
from the calcifying fluid was estimated to be ~3 times higher than previously calculated.
Our numerical simulation reveals that ocean acidification (OA) decreases the pH at the
base of coelenteron, and this pH decline is greatly amplified by the deeper coelenteron
and high calcification rates.

With public and private funding support, eight coastal communities in West Hawai’i met
in 2012 to identify shared challenges and opportunities and agreed that mutual support
would be of benefit. Since that time, they have grown into the Kai Kuleana Network and
are devoted to supporting one another in stewardship, education, and policy initiatives
in various stages of development and implementation. Through quarterly participatory
meetings, shared values and training objectives have been identified and substantive
progress has been made in accomplishing both individual community objectives and
broader goals that affect all of West Hawai’i. By sharing knowledge and lessons learned
with one another and at larger events, such as the Hawai’i Conservation Conference,
network members inspire others, maintain effective communications, accelerate learning
and amplify impact to address complex problems faced by coastal and marine communities in West Hawaii – problems that are shared throughout Hawai’i and the Pacific.

RECREATIONAL SPEARFISHING ON CORAL REEFS: AN AUSTRALIAN PERSPECTIVE (Abstract ID: 27785)


Recreational fishing is a growing component of the world’s fisheries and is increasingly
linked to declines in fish populations. However, due to an absence of past monitoring
data, recreational fisheries are poorly understood, difficult to assess and pose governance challenges. We explored historical trends in recreational spearfishing in Australia,
as documented in a 58-year chronology of spearfishing magazines. Data were extracted
from reported fish captures, advertising, and spearfisher commentary and assessed
with regression models and ordination analyses. The proportion of coastal fish captures
reported declined by approximately 80%, whereas coral reef and pelagic fish reports
increased 1750% and 560%, respectively. Reported catch composition shifted markedly
from coastal temperate fishes during the 1950s to 1970s to coral reef and pelagic species in the 1990s to 2000s. The mean weight of reported trophy coral reef fishes also
declined significantly over the study period, potentially reflecting their vulnerability to
fishing. Interviews with fishers in Australia and the Solomon Islands also provided crosscultural insight into the reasons why fishers engage in fishing. We found a strong perception that fishing delivers a range of benefits to individuals and societies. These results
emphasise the need for regulatory agencies to work closely with fishing communities to
observe fisher behaviour, detect shifts in target species or fishing intensity, and to channel
the motivations and values of fishers for the benefit of ecosystems and society.

PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF WHOLE GENOME SEQUENCING ANALYSIS OF
Poster ID: 73)
Sea level fluctuations associated with Pleistocene glaciation have great genetic impacts
on marine species that seldom experience vicariance. Previous studies using morphological data and partial mitochondrial genes indicated Pleistocene vicariance caused
allopatric speciation between the Indian and Pacific Oceans in marine species. However,
impacts on the whole genome are still unclear. Here we present preliminary results of
whole genome comparisons of Acanthaster planci, whose sudden population outbreaks
have been one of the largest issues in conservation of coral reefs in the Indo-Pacific
region, to examine the impacts of Pleistocene vicariance at a whole genome level. We
collected specimens from Phuket in Thailand (Indian Ocean species), Miyazaki in Japan
(Pacific species) and Hawaii (genetically distinct Pacific species). Heterozygosity was
highest in Miyazaki and followed by Phuket and Hawaii, implying the isolated population
in Hawaii has lower genetic diversity. Estimated whole genome sizes ranged from 400 to
450 Mbp. While the similarity of the whole mitochondrial genome sequence was about
91% between Indian and Pacific species that between two Pacific species was 99%. On
the other hand, a rough estimate of whole genome sequence similarity between Indian
and Pacific species was 98% and that between Miyazaki and Hawaii was 99%. These
results suggest, as predicted by smaller effective population size of the mitochondrial
genome, neutral mitochondrial genes had experienced much stronger genetic drift than
nuclear genes.


A SEMI-IN SITU EXPERIMENT OF LARVAL DEVELOPMENT OF SCLERACTINIAN CORAL ACROPORA GEMMIFERA IN RESPONSE TO ELEVATED PCO2
(Abstract ID: 29232 | Poster ID: 25)
Here, we investigated the effects of acute exposure to elevated CO2 on skeletogenesis
and gene expression in primary polyps of Acropora gemmifera and the variance of
metamorphosis using Illumina RNAseq approach. Embryo and juvenile were exposed to
3 targeted pH values (pHT = 8.13, 7.82, and 7.53), which correspond to the designated
pCO2 levels (389, 700, and 1214 μatm) that were projected for the pCO2 levels of the
present, the end of the present century, and next century. According to the data of
skeleton development, compare the proportion of 4-loop-synapticulae period at 6d-28d
between groups, there were significant differences (P<0.05) between groups pH8.1 and

383

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


and lesions caused mainly by bioeroders and fishes, 31% overgrowth by invertebrates
(mainly sponges) and algae, 17% stages of bleaching, and 7% disease dominated by
white syndromes. Coral diseases included Skeletal Eroding Band, Brown Band, Black
Band, Yellow Band, White Syndrome, and Growth Anomalies. Porites, Acropora, Montipora, and Stylophora experienced highest frequencies of disease. Favia and Platygyra,
important reef framework corals, were among the top ten most diseased corals. Owing
to the significance of corals as indicators for the state of the marine environment, this
coral diseases information is crucial for management of coral reef conservation areas

TEMPERATURE VARIATION AND CORAL COMMUNITY STRUCTURE OF MESOPHOTIC REEF ECOSYSTEM IN PALAU (Abstract ID: 28514)
Tropical mesophotic reef ecosystems are receiving attention in recent years among
coral reef researchers due to their potential as refugia for shallow coral reef ecosystems.
Light has been shown to be a limiting factor of coral community in mesophotic reefs
while temperature was suggested as not a significant abiotic factor. In light of the prediction of severe El Nino event for 2015/16, seawater temperature variation and its effects
on coral community in mesophotic reefs can fill the critical gap in knowledge in the
physical-biological link between mesophotic reefs and their shallow counterparts. An ongoing seawater temperature monitoring in several mesophotic reef ecosystems in Palau
has been carried out since year 2014. Temperature loggers are being deployed at every
5-m depth interval up to 40 m depth in the outer reefs in Palau. Temperatures as low
as 19 to 22 degree Celsius have been recorded in depths between 30 to 40 meters with
daily fluctuation ranged from 8 to 10 degree Celsius. Extent of cool water pulsing was
recorded as shallow as 15 m depth. Seasonal upwelling occurred at higher frequency
between January to June resulted in bigger daily and monthly temperature fluctuations
in deep water compared to other months. This indicates that corals in mesophotic reefs
in Palau are constantly being subjected to big temperature variations. Additional information such as reef community, hydrodynamic processes, light availability, nutrient flux is
needed to provide comprehensive baseline data of mesophotic reefs in Palau.


DYNAMIC CHANGES IN GENE EXPRESSION DURING EARLY STAGE OF CORALALGAL SYMBIOSIS (Abstract ID: 29403 | Poster ID: 124)
C Symbiodinium hardly increased in juvenile polyps during the first 2 months after
inoculation, while clade D spread in polyps in about two weeks. It was unclear why
these Symbiodinium increased in juvenile polyps in different timings. It seemed that host
corals have different preparation periods to make endosymbiotic relationship with clade
two Symbiodinium (clade C and clade D), and investigated molecular mechanisms for
the establishment of coral-Symbiodinium endosymbiosis with transcriptome changes
by RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq). The result showed that the number of differentially
expressed genes (DEG) was increased with increasing of endosymbiotic algae. From
this result, we found some enriched biological processes in endosymbiotic juveniles. We
present here about candidate genes involving in establishment of endosymbiosis, and
the differences in clade C-symbiosis and clade D-symbiosis.


IDENTIFY TYPE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REEF SHARKS SPECIES IN MEKO
WATER, DISTRICT OF EAST FLORES, EAST NUSA TENGGARA (Abstract ID: 29480
| Poster ID: 273)
Adonara Island is one of big islands in District of East Flores that has total an approximately 519.64 km2 of land area. Based on shark bycatch survey in January 2015 by
WWF Indonesia, it is known that 71.31% of shark species is caught accidentally. Meko
Water is the highest area for shark bycatch level than other areas. The purpose of this
research was to collect data and information about types, distribution and habitat of
shark species in Meko Water, East Flores. We conducted underwater visual census with
long swim in for 4 different depths (5, 10, 15 and 20 m) for 40 minutes (10 minutes in
each depth). Location determination was based on multilevel methods with total of 20
dive sites that were divided into 3 different clusters (semi hotspot, hotspot and control
zone). There were 2 species of sharks that were found in Meko Water; blacktip reef
sharks (Carcharinus melanopterus) with 86 sightings (82.69%) and whitetip reef sharks
(Triaenodon obesus) with 18 sightings (17.31%). The average size of blacktip was 100
cm with range of 50-150 cm and whitetip was 103 cm with range of 70-120 cm. The
highest sighting of sharks was found in fringing reef (75%) in control zone as many as
39 sightings. The result of this research will used to be a basic information for formulate
the recommendation for shark fisheries management in East Flores District. Keywords:
shark species, distribution, sightings, Meko Water, East Flores


PREDICTED RESPONSES OF CORAL REEFS TO THERMAL STRESS AND ITS APPLICATION TO CORAL REEF MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 29199)
Vulnerability of thermal stress to coral reefs such as mass coral bleaching and threaten
reefs worldwide. NOAA Coral Reef Temperature Anomaly Database Version 4 (CoRTAD) with weekly data of 4 x 4 km resolution from 1981 was used to develop a tool
for assessing bleaching risk assessment for the entire atolls of Maldives. Application of
outputs of this tool enabled identifying reef areas that have the highest and lowest risk
to bleaching. This study use thermal stress information at selected reefs in Baa atoll Biosphere reserve and assess the reefs using bleaching assessment methodology prepared
by Australian Institute of Marine Sciences as standard means of assessing bleaching.
This is particularly useful in time of predicted bleaching and compare with proxies of
chronic and acute thermal stress. Identification and application of these (acute and
chronic) thermal stress areas enabled to put evidence to the theory: corals acclimated to
warmer conditions fare better during acute (bleaching) events than corals acclimated to
cooler conditions. Policy makers and reef managers can use the outputs of this through
identification of reef areas that are resilient and vulnerable to coral bleaching for developing reef management policy and strategy. It can also be used as an advocacy tool for
climate change impacts on coral reefs of Maldives and consequential economic impacts.


EFFECTIVENESS AND PRODUCTIVITY HAND LINES WITH DIFFERENT
BRANCH LINE AROUND PORTABLE FISH AGGREGATING DEVICE (Abstract ID:
27871 | Poster ID: 264)


This research used portable FADs, hand line with a length of branch line to be 0.9 m; 1.2
m; and 1.5 m. The purpose of this research to prove influenced of the length of branch line
on technical performance. This research was used experimental fishing methods in around
of portable FADs area. The fishing location at Indian Ocean on 8º07.615’ S - 106º24.89’ E
and 8º21.03’ S - 106º26.89’ E for 6 days and grouped period into morning and afternoon.
The catch was 176 fishes with weight 379.7 kg, they were 104 yellowfin tuna (254.7 kg),
68 skipjack tuna (116.1 kg ) and 4 dolphinfish (8.9 kg). Hand line with branch line 1.5 m
produced at most yellowfin tuna, as many as 70 fishes with weight 141.3 kg, or an average
individual weight of 2.83 kg. The result of the analisys of varians F-test was p-value =
0.397 > 0.05; it means there is no influence significantly the length of branch line catches
obtained. Key words: FADs portable, hand line, branch line, Indian Ocean

CHARACTERIZATION OF AMMONIUM TRANSPORTERS INSYMBIODINIUM
MICROADRIATICUM (Abstract ID: 29068)
Nitrogen is a limiting factor for growth in oligotrophic environments of tropical seas. Accordingly, many marine organisms acquired the ability to fix nitrogen from inorganic sources.
Corals, as well as Symbiodinium, their dinoflagellate symbionts, are able to utilize ammonium
as an inorganic nitrogen source. In a recent study of Symbiodinium genomes, we revealed
an unexpected abundance and diversity of ammonium transporter (AMT) genes across
this genus. Phylogenetic analysis of those genes indicated homology to yeast and bacterial
ammonium transporters; protein sequence analysis of cloned cDNAs verified the conservation of residues essential for AMT function. These findings suggest that Symbiodinium might
have evolved an excess of AMTs in response to nitrogen limitation in hospite. Symbiodinium
reside within a specialized intracellular organelle, termed symbiosome, which provides an
acidic microenvironment with a pH of 4-6, as opposed to a pH of 8.1 typical of seawater. In
order to determine if AMTs evolved in response to symbiosis, we aim to perform functional
analysis of these transporters in yeast mutants to determine their specificity, affinity, and


RAPID ASSESSMENT FOR CORAL DISEASE IN SAWU SEA MARINE NATIONAL
PARK, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 29464 | Poster ID: 165)
In November 2014, The Nature Conservancy coordinated a Rapid Ecological Assessment of the Sawu Sea Marine National Park (SSMNP) that included measures of reef
health. Health indicators included disease, bleaching, predation, overgrowth. Of 54 surveyed reefs, 52% were badly damaged, 40% in fair condition, and 8% were healthy. We
recorded 2,068 scleractinian coral colonies with health problems: 45% suffered predation

384

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Millepora, Stylophora and one specimen of the Caryophylliidae family. Arroyo Ekieps
has a higher richness (25 species) than Arroyo Uitpa (9 species). ii) There were low
levels of siliciclastic input in Arroyo Uitpa and no significant input in Arroyo Ekieps. iii)
The presence of larger archaiasinids , Miogypsina sp. and Amphistegina ssp. suggest an
early Miocene age for both sites. iv) Raup-Crick Similarity Index shows a high similarity
to early-Miocene reefs in Mexico, Florida and Venezuela. Further research effort will be
focused on dating more precisely both sites of the Siamaná Formation.

pH-dependent activity. We also expect to see an increase inSymbiodinium growth rates as
a response to controlled culture experiments using decreased pH and limited ammonium
concentration. We believe that the evolution of functional AMTs at different pH conditions
is a key aspect in maintaining a symbiotic lifestyle.


THE IMPACT OF HEAVY METALS CONTENT TO GROWTH OF CORALS
PORITES LUTEA BASED ON ANNUALLY-BANDED AT TUNDA ISLAND, BANTEN
BAY (Abstract ID: 29208 | Poster ID: 390)

VARIABILITY OF TUNA PREY ITEMS ALONG THE COAST OF SOUTHERN
MINDANAO, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29246 | Poster ID: 274)

In order to assess pollutants and the impacts of environmental change at Tunda Island,
heavy metal concentrations of Cr, Sr, Fe, Zn, and Pb were traced through analysis of
coral skeletal growth bands in cores of the massive coral Porites lutea. Core sections
were examined using x radioagraphy and samples extracted from annual growth bands.
Samples of coral skeleton were analyzed using neutron activation analysis and atomic
absorption spectrometry to detect metal concentrational in annual growth bands. Results
indicated that corals on the windward side of the island incorporated metal concentrations (Cr, Sr, Fe, Zn, Pb) in 1940 and metal levels were still detectable up to 2014. On the
leeward side of the islands accumulation of heavy metals in the coral skeleton began
in 1969 and was still evident up to 2014. The concentration of heavy metal pollutant in
corals from the windward and leeward reefs showed a significant decline over time, while
the concentration of strontium remained relatively stable. Anthropogenic influences on
the Java mainland are likely responsible for heavy metal pollution in seawaters around
bands, Tunda Island

Tuna and its allies are migratory and are among the large predators in the marine pelagic
environment. The abundance and distribution of tuna stocks are not limited to the actual
extraction site but is dependent on the availability of their prey items. To supplement
visual inspection of partially digested prey from the gut, molecular tools must be used
to identify degraded prey items to give insights on the migration pattern of tuna in
Mindanao. In this study, we report the identification of tuna prey from the gut contents
of Yellowfin tuna landed in Sarangani and Zamboanga using COI DNA barcodes. A total
of 69 guts were obtained from the public markets. Initial results revealed that prey items
of Yellowfin tuna differ in the 2 landing sites in Philippines. In Sarangani, tuna prey was
primarily several small tuna species, Thunnus albacares (33.4%) , Thunnus atlanticus
(11.1%), Thunnus obesus (11.1%), Thunnus tonggol (11.1%) and Thunnus Maccoyii
(11.1%), Pinktail triggerfish (Melichthys vidua, 11.1 %) and Duckbill barracudina (Magnisudis atlantica, 11.1%) while in Zamboanga, it is Bigeye cigarfish (Cubiceps pauciradiatus, 60.0%), and small Yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares, 40.0%). However, predatorprey relationships in tuna must be interpreted with caution as it may be influenced by the
use of bait and/or the catching practices in each site.


BLEACHING IN PALAEOZOIC CORALS? (Abstract ID: 27867 | Poster ID: 235)

USING 3D SCANNING TO QUANTIFY CORAL MORPHOLOGY (Abstract ID:
28681)

Recent scleractinian corals owe their bioconstructing abilities to symbiosis with dinoflagellates. These algae do not fossilize, hence the reasoning for the photosymbiosis is
indirect. In scleractinians photosymbiosis usually correlates with high integration of large
sized colonies and small sizes of polyps. The oldest known presumably photosymbiotic
scleractinians are Triassic (~245 Myr). Earlier Palaeozoic reefs were built by other corals:
Tabulata and Rugosa (subclasses extinct at the end of Permian, ~252 Myr). Palaeozoic
bioconstructions containing corals first appeared in the Ordovician (~450 Myr). It has
been evidenced that tabulate corals posessed photosymbionts as early as in the Silurian
(~430 Myr), but Ordovician specimens from Estonia suggest even earlier photosymbiosis. Reefal structures were several times in severe decline during their history. It has been
hypothesized that the cause of these events were expulsions of zooxanthellae (possibly
similar to bleaching). The aim of this study is to test this hypothesis. One of such collapses of reefal systems was the Late Devonian (~375 Myr) extinction event. Tabulate
faunas from the Late Devonian of the Holy Cross Mts (Central Poland) are investigated
here. The analyzed pre-extinction faunas have moderately integrated colonies, with small
individuals and moderately large colonies, suggesting photosymbiosis. Post extinction
corals have larger individuals, small colonies, and variable integration levels, being possibly aposymbiotic. These observations may evidence change in photosymbionts, similar
to recent bleaching.

Scleractinian coral species exhibit a diverse range of morphologies, some of which vary
significantly across environmental gradients such as light and wave energy. Morphology determines two key coral traits: surface area and volume. Surface area relates to a
colony’s capacity for photosynthesis, heterotrophy and reproduction. Colony volume
relates to mechanical damage thresholds and resource acquisition. Therefore, morphology is a fundamental determinant of the ecological success of corals; driving species
coexistence, competition and community structure. However, due to technological
based on quantitative measurements of morphology is slow, expensive, inaccurate and/
or restricted by portability. Here we present results using handheld 3D laser scanning to
quantitatively measure morphological traits across a range of morphologies. Specifically,
we compare how surface area, volume and planar area, relate to morphological groups
and attempt to collapse colony morphology into a few continuous axes of individual
level variation in morphology. Of these, surface area to volume ratios stand out as a
key trait for comparing how growth form categories can be arranged on a quantitative
continuum. We propose a hypothesis on how surface area to volume ratios may explain
differences in coral demographic rates, highlighting the potential advantages of moving
towards a quantitative framework of coral morphology.



CONSERVATION GENETICS APPROACHES TO ASEXUAL CORAL RESTORATION
ACTIVITIES (Abstract ID: 27914)


The elucidations of the present population structure and genetic diversity are of fundamental importance in establishment effective conservation measures of coral reefs. Coral reefs have various values, but have been decreasing around the world by both global
climate change and local anthropogenic effects. In the past decade, coral transplantation
has been recognized as a prime management tool for restoration. Asexually method of
transplantation has been conducted in many places of the world. However, there has
been concern about adverse effects of transplantation for the purpose of restoration,
such as loss of genetic diversity, break down local genetic structures and genetic introgression. To compare genetic diversity between cultured and wild population, we studied
with Acropora tenuisthrough the Nansei Islands, Japan by using 13 microsatellite markers.
For wild population, we assessed the population structure and genetic diversity of 298

EARLY-MIOCENE REEFS IN THE SIAMANÁ FORMATION, LA GUAJIRA – NE
COLOMBIA (Abstract ID: 29726 | Poster ID: 6)
We studied two reef sites (Arroyo Ekieps and Arroyo Uitpa) in the Siamaná Formation
in the Guajira Peninsula, Northern Colombia. Our preliminary results indicate that: i) The
reefs are composed by 28 species of zooxanthellate corals, included in 16 genera and 12
families commonly associated to shallow environments and to patch and fringing reefs.
There are four species of Montastraea and Porites, three species of Astrocoenia, two
species each of Agathiphyllia, Diploastrea, Siderastrea, one species each of Acropora,
Alveopora, Antiguastrea, Astreopora, Colpophyllia, Goniastrea, Goniopora, Heliopora,

385

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

the wild. The genetic diversity was not significantly different among populations even in
possibly peripheral distribution. In addition, our results show that there are at least two
colonies from 3 coral farms in Okinawajima Island, Japan. The genetic diversity of each
farm is compared with that of wild populations. We believe that accurate evaluations
using genetic tools will be valuable for successful restoration of coral reefs.

MODEL SUGGESTS CORAL POPULATION RECOVERY AFTER REMOVAL OF
ANTHROPOGENIC DISTURBANCE (LUHUITOU, HAINAN, SOUTH CHINA SEA)
(Abstract ID: 28108 | Poster ID: 531)
Luhuitou reef is a fringing reef at Hainan Island, South China Sea. Coral communities suffered dramatic decline over the past 50 years under chronic anthropogenic
disturbances. Since the establishment of a marine reserve in the 1990s, the frequency
and intensity of disturbances declined. Massive Porites dominate in the current coral
communities. A matrix population model was based on size-frequency data from field
work and projected population trajectories over 100 years under no disturbance and random disturbances. The model reflects a largely open population of massive Porites, with
low local recruitment and preponderance of imported recruitment. Under no further
disturbance, the population of massive Porites will grow and its size structure will change
from predominance of small size classes to large size classes. Therewith, total Porites
cover will increase. Even under random disturbances between 10 and 20 years, the
Porites population could remain viable, albeit at lower space cover. The models suggest
recovery at Luhuitou following the removal of chronic anthropogenic disturbance. Extending the area of coral reef reserve to protect the open coral community and the path
of connectivity is advisable and imperative in the conservation of Hainan’s coral reefs.


SIZE-STRUCTURAL SHIFTS REVEAL INTENSITY OF EXPLOITATION IN CORAL
REEF FISHERIES (Abstract ID: 29832)
Fisheries represent a considerable threat to coral reef resources because fishers typically
target large-bodied species. Although species occupying higher trophic groups are known
to suffer a majority of the exploitative effects, changes in composition among lower trophic groups may be significant. Using size-based biomass spectra analysis, we investigate
the effects of fishing on the size-structure of fish assemblages and determine if patterns
of exploitation vary across trophic groups. Our analyses reveal striking evidence for the
effects exploitation can have on fish assemblages. When examining biomass spectra
across the entire assemblage we found consistent evidence of “size-specific exploitation”, a process by which large-bodied individuals experience disproportionate reductions within the top predatory trophic group. However, when assemblages were analyzed
among trophic groups, two additional forms of exploitation were realized; “size-biased
exploitation”, in which all sizes are exploited with a bias toward greater proportional
effect on larger-bodied individuals, and “size-neutral exploitation”, in which proportional
exploitation is equivalent across all size classes. Importantly, the breadth of size classes
and trophic groups that showed evidence of exploitation related positively to local
human population density and diversity of fishing methods employed. Our findings highlight the complexity of coral reef fisheries and that the effects of exploitation are realized
across multiple trophic groups and not solely restricted to large-bodied top-predators.



MICROBIOME DYNAMICS IN EARLY LIFE STAGES OF SCLERACTINIAN CORAL
ACROPORA GEMMIFERA (Abstract ID: 28288 | Poster ID: 145)
Reef-building coral health highly depends on associated microbes, but little is known
how they are developed at different coral developmental stages. Here, we conduct a
case study to elucidate the establishment of coral associated microbes through coral life
cycle. The microbiota of scleractinian coral Acropora gemmifera at various developmental stages were explored by high-throughput 16S rDNA sequencing analysis. Our results
show that microbial communities in eggs are highly similar to parental adults, suggesting
host coral can vertically transmit microbes to its offspring. Such new finding broadens
our understanding of vertical transmission of associated microbes in corals. Microbial
community structures were shifted differently from eggs to juveniles. Such variations
may be related to coral development and environmental factors. Some specific microbes
were accumulated at certain developmental stage. For example, the phylum Cyanobacteria was particularly abundant at juveniles and its abundance in 6-day-old juvenile was
higher than that in 31-day-old. In contrast, the genusRuegeria affiliating to Rosebacter
clade was all detected through the life cycle. In conclusion, coral eggs can obtain associated microbes by vertical transmission, but the microbial community structures varied
more during the coral offspring development from eggs to juveniles.

AN OUTBREAK OF A SESSILE SEA CUCUMBER REDUCES POST-SETTLEMENT
SURVIVORSHIP OF CORAL RECRUITS (Abstract ID: 28561)
An outbreak of sessile sea cucumbers, Ocnus Sanya, occurred on the degraded Luhuitou
coral reef in Sanya Bay, Hainan, China. This study explored the pattern of distribution of
2000 individuals m-2 on hard substrate in 4m depth, which is significant higher than
those on 2m and 6m depth, and the average coverage on hard substrate ranged from
m-2, mean ± SD) on the surface, the tiles had 19.7% more surface sediment than those
207.3 and 1126 ± 250 individuals m-2 respectively, mean ± SD) were only half and one
the sediment stress on coral recruits.



CORAL MICROBIOMES AND HEAT STRESS – TESTING THE PROBIOTIC HYPOTHESIS IN A LONG-TERM RECIPROCAL TRANSPLANTATION EXPERIMENT
(Abstract ID: 28016)
Ocean warming is an immediate threat to coral reef ecosystems worldwide, and it
remains unknown to what extent the coral-associated microbial community may
contribute to coral resilience. To begin to address this question, we used a long-term
reciprocal transplantation experiment of Acropora hyacinthus between two thermally
distinct backreef pools on Ofu Island, American Samoa. Native coral colonies in the two
pools had different microbial communities. Moreover, after 17 months of transplantation,
microbiomes of non-native corals transplanted into each pool adjusted to the new environmental conditions and were not significantly different from native corals in the same
pool. In short-term heat stress experiments, the microbial community responded within
20 hours for corals that had been transplanted to a more stable, cooler environment. But
386

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Coral reefs of islands nations are threatened by climate change and land-based anthropogenic pollution. Preserving and enhancing the resiliency of these coral reefs to climate
change is paramount as a conservation measure and to reduce coastal hazards. A more
resilient coastal zone is an important component of sustaining the overall economic and
social health of Barbados. The Barbados Coastal Zone Management Unit is presently
executing the Coastal Risk Assessment and Management Program (CRMP). The goals
of the Ecosystem Based Adaptation Pilot Project, one aspect of the CRMP, include: 1)
identify and characterizing land and marine based sources of stress that impact fringing
reefs, 2) completing a coral nursery pilot project to support fringing reef restoration,
and 3) develop a future hierarchical-management strategy to mitigate the major factors
that degrade the resiliency of the fringing reefs. During the field program we collected
specific parameters to be used as “markers for management effectiveness.” The various factors affecting coral reef resiliency will be discussed as well as the two primary
processes: eutrophication and chemical pollution. The sources of nutrients (sewage
vs. agriculture) driving the eutrophication were characterized spatially and over time.
Numerical modeling tools were used to investigate the potential benefits of future reef
restoration efforts on wave energy dissipation, reductions in beach erosion, and storm
damage mitigation. Coupling pollution forensics with coral aquaculture and restoration is
a strategy to increase coastal resiliency.

colonies living in the warmer, more variable environment for 17 months bleached less
and maintained their original microbial communities. The robust and stable microbiome
of the highly variable pool was characterized by a consistent set of microbial taxa across
all control and heat treatments that were not (or only rarely) present in the susceptible
corals transplanted to the more stable, cooler pool. Overall, our data provide evidence
for a community of microbes associated with heat resistance patterns of corals across
variable habitats. Whether these microbial differences influence thermal resilience, or are
influenced by it, remains to be determined.

ASYMMETRICAL MESOPREDATOR RELEASE: MORAY EELS INCONSPICUOUSLY PREDOMINATE HEAVILY FISHED REEFS (Abstract ID: 29640 | Poster ID: 253)
Populations of apex predators have declined globally due to human activities. In the
absence of sufficient top-down control, mid-level predators can increase drastically
in number (termed “mesopredator release”), which may lead to a trophic cascade
that severely impacts the bottom-level prey populations in an ecosystem. On densely
populated, accessible coastlines of the Main Hawaiian Islands, few large piscivorous fish
remain. Nonetheless, these habitats are not functionally devoid of apex predators; rather,
on heavily fished reefs, fishermen act as a top predator in the system. However, prey
selectivities of humans differ from that of the natural predator assemblage, exerting high
levels of top-down control on some targeted fishes and little pressure on non-target species, such as moray eels. Due to their cryptic nature, moray eels are underestimated in
visual fish surveys. Consequently, almost no accurate data is available on eel abundances
over space or time. Here, we developed a novel eel surveying technique that involves
chum deployment on a defined transect to obtain a more accurate eel density estimate.
We use this method to then examine how the eel biomass density relative to other reef
fishes changes across a gradient of fishing intensity. We hypothesize that the reduction
and replacement of natural apex predators with human predators has led to an asymmetrical release of moray eels from top-down control in heavily fished areas.


ANALYZING DISTRIBUTION OF CORAL RECRUITS USING FLUORESCENCE
IMAGING (Abstract ID: 28151)
Coral recruitment is a fundamental process that inﬂuences coral population dynamics
as well as reef community structure. Formation of new juvenile colonies is essential for
recovery and indicates good conditions for development and growth of coral reefs. To
date, coral recruitment success rates are poorly described; therefore developing an effective survey method for coral recruits distribution analysis is essential. Due to the fact that
corals and their symbiotic algae both contain florescence pigments, (chlorophyll-a and
fluorescent proteins), we used the FluorIS- Fluorescence Imaging System, to develop
a non-invasive method to identify coral recruits in situ during daytime. In this study we
tested the efficiency and accuracy of this method by monitoring twenty random quadrats for ten months. Our results show that this low cost, easy to use method, reduces
worms) and/or surveyor errors. Using this time series we positively identified coral
recruits as small as 0.2 cm in diameter and were able to record their settlement, growth
and mortality. World’s coral reefs are declining and at risk of collapse as a result of
local and global stressors. Understanding physiology and survival of coral recruits will
improve future predictions of their ability to resist, respond and recover under stress.


REDUCED METABOLISM, LIMITED STAMINA: ECOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS OF
ELEVATED CO2 ON A KEY GRAZER (Abstract ID: 30062 | Poster ID: 381)


Ocean acidification has been identified as a threat to coral reef communities in subtropical and tropical regions. Studies have indicated that fish may have positive, negative, or
neutral physiological responses to elevated CO2, and these responses are likely speciesspecific. More recently, research has indicated that elevated CO2 has a pronounced
has addressed how grazers, key to coral reef health, may respond to acidified seawater
predicted to occur as the climate changes. The purpose of this experiment was to assess
the feeding behavior, swimming performance, and metabolic responses of parrotfish
exposed to CO2-acidified seawater. To do this, striped parrotfish (Scarus iserti) were
acclimated to ambient sea water at 8.2 pH, seawater manipulated to a pH of 7.9, and
seawater manipulated to a pH of 7.6 over a 24 hour period and held in these conditions
for 14 days. Parrotfish exposed to a pH of 7.6 experienced lower metabolic rates while
processing food relative to fish in ambient seawater. Fish chased until exhaustion traveled shorter distances and fatigued more quickly in CO2-acidified seawater relative to
control conditions. Ocean acidification may impair digestion, thereby, limiting growth
and reproduction in striped parrotfish. In combination with elevated mortality due to
inability to escape predators, parrotfish may have a reduced capacity to manage algal
growth on coral reefs.

EFFECTS OF ELEVATED PCO2 ON PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN TROPICAL MACROALGAE (Abstract ID: 29736 | Poster ID: 284)
As ocean pH decreases due to increasing atmospheric anthropogenic CO2, the levels
of pCO2 and HCO3- available in seawater for photosynthesis increases. Little is known
about how photosynthesis in macroalgal species will be affected. Different species may
have varying responses due to species-specific inorganic carbon uptake mechanisms.
We hypothesize that elevated pCO2 will increase photosynthetic rates of tropical
macroalgae that are undersaturated by current DIC levels (~2 mM), or that possess
ineffective carbon concentrating mechanisms. We studied eight species of calcifying
and fleshy tropical macroalgae chosen for their ecological significance on coral reefs.
All species were collected from the same shallow (~5 m) patch reef site along the
Florida Reef Tract. Photosynthetic rates were determined at three pH levels (7.8, 8.1
and 8.4) to determine the effects of CO2 availability on DIC uptake. At each pH level,
photosynthesis was determined across a range of irradiances to examine the energetic
requirements of DIC uptake. To discern inorganic carbon uptake mechanisms, we
measured photosynthetic rates in the presence and absence of inhibitors of internal and
external carbonic anhydrase (AZ and EZ). We found that species had varying responses
to elevated pCO2, but that the majority showed an increase in photosynthetic rates at
Our results suggest that species-specific inorganic carbon uptake mechanisms likely play
a role in macroalgal responses to elevated pCO2.


INCREASING THE RESILIENCE OF CORAL REEFS AND INFRASTRUCTURE TO
CLIMATE CHANGE THREATS IN BARBADOS BY IDENTIFYING, CHARACTERIZNG AND ADDRESSING LOCAL STRESSORS (Abstract ID: 29830 | Poster ID: 459)
387

ICRS

