13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


TOWARDS DEVELOPING A FRAMEWORK FOR REEF RESILIENCE: A GREAT
BARRIER REEF CASE STUDY (Abstract ID: 29211)
The resilience of the Great Barrier Reef to a changing climate is predicted to vary
greatly across the 344,400 km2 and 2,900 individual reefs that make up the world
heritage site. Resilience-based management allows responsive adaptation to this challenge. Understanding the capacity of the reef to resist and recover from a broad range
of threats and disturbances it faces is crucial for long-term protection. The science of
resilience has increasingly become the focus for measuring and managing reef health,
however there are still significant gaps when it comes to how to operationalise resiliencebased management. The Great Barrier Reef Foundation is convening experts in reef
science, conservation and management to develop a globally applicable Reef Resilience
Framework. The approach in developing the framework is integrative, collaborative and
practical – it recognises the complexity of the ecosystem, is underpinned by the adaptive
management principle and is cognisant of the need for communities as well as the ecosystems to adapt to climate change. The framework is intended to provide a mechanism
to drive action towards building reef resilience and support resilience planning. It will aid
in the assessment and prioritisation of key threats and support decision-making, particularly in relation to the implementation of effective management solutions designed to
enhance ecosystem resilience.

RESILIENCE-BASED MANAGEMENT IN REMOTE ATOLLS OF THE INDIAN OCEAN:
AN OPERATIONAL CASE STUDY FROM THE MALDIVES (Abstract ID: 29591)
The Maldives is an archipelago containing approximately 1200 coral reef islands with more
than 305 that harbor communities and permanent settlements that are heavily dependent
on reef resources. Due to its vulnerability to climate change and its high resource-dependence, an urgent need to incorporate resilience science into conservation planning and
local management was identified. Detailed ecological and socio-economic data for coral
reefs and local communities were collected and mapped at a national scale. We developed
a management framework that explicitly incorporates both ecological and social resilience,
variations in human impact, uncertainty, and identifies the necessary interventions required
to address multiple objectives in different atolls. The analysis identified atoll areas regularly
used by local communities and private sector resorts, areas that present potential conflict
between users, and finally ecologically significant areas. Specific locations were designated
conservation priorities as they contain both ecological and social values that are not
currently addressed by any existing management scheme. Systematic conservation and
spatial planning processes were useful in identifying priority areas but are only effective if
accompanied with innovative decentralized governance. Specific management actions are
planned for each atoll and will be integrated into national policy.

Abouzaid, M. M., Al-Azhar University, Egypt

DIFFERENT GROWTH STRATEGIES FOR THE CORAL SPECIES SETTLED ON
NEW MODEL MANUFACTURED OF SEMI-ARTIFICIAL SUBSTRATES, RED SEA,
EGYPT (Abstract ID: 28593 | Poster ID: 179)
Growth and development of recognized coral recruits settled on the artificial model
surface was recorded over two years at Hurghada, Red Sea. One soft and several hard
recruits were recorded on the models surface. Different strategies of recruit development were performed. Accordingly, month of first species observed, number of polyps,
species development with seasonal monitoring of the dimensional changes, seasonal
variation in percentage of area development and increase in circumference of each
species over the two years was carried out. This indicated a species specific pattern
of development that differs significantly among coral families. These differences in the
growth pattern of coral species are most probably related to the strategy used by each
of the species to achieve its maximum growth and establishment of the colony to the
substrate at the same time. Most common development pattern recorded follows the
polynomial type, which indicated that the growth in the colonies dose not depend on the
arrival of new recruits to the site but on the availability of certain parameters which may
include food, illumination and temperature. So in most cases the asexual reproduction
is the common type of reproduction until colonies reach certain size (or age) or develop
mature enough individuals that are able to produce gametes.
http://reefdomeegypt.page.tl/


LONG TERM REEF HEALTH MONITORING (2004-2013) AT ABANG WATERS,
BATAM CITY, RIAU ISLANDS PROVINCE (Abstract ID: 27786)
Long term reef health that was expressed as coral live cover and others reef benthics
cover monitoring at Abang Waters, Batam City, Riau Islands Province. The aims of
monitoring observed, whether the reef benthic covers were changed on a temporal and
spatial scale. Reef Monitoring in 2013 is a nine (9) years period, since baseline on 2004
at 12 different sites. Reef health monitoring have used Line Intercept Transect (LIT)
method, with ten meter transect long and three (3) transects for representated , and they
were lied on 5-7 meter depth. Change of coral cover and others benthic on a temporal
and spatial scale was analyzed by one-way ANOVA with further tested by Tukey with
p=0.05. Result of monitoring shown that average of coral live cover was 50.71%, however live coral cover have been decrease compared in 2010 which their cover 68,62%.
On a temporal scale, the result of monitoring have been shown that significant changed
to several benthic cover included coral live cover Acoropora (p=0.04), Sponge (p=0.05)
and Coral Ruble (p=0.003), whereas on a spatial scale, the all monitoring sites were
experienced decrease in coral live cover. The environment factors were predicted by
sedimentation loading and sea temperature stress was indicated by coral bleaching event
in 2007 and 2010. The nine (9) years monitoring have been done which shown that
decreased live coral cover, however not changed reef health condition Key Words: reef
health, reef monitoring, coral cover, benthic cover, Abang Islands

Abdel-Salam, H. A., Marine Genomics Lab, Zoology Dept, Faculty of Science,University of
Donia, A. H., Marine Genomics Lab, Zoology Dept, Faculty of Science,University of Benha,
EL Shaarawy, H. I., Marine Genomics Lab, Zoology Dept, Faculty of Science,University of

HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN GENE HSP70 AS AN INDICATOR FOR DETERMINING
THERMAL STRESS RESPONSE IN STYLOPHORA PISTILLATA FROM GULF OF
SUEZ, RED SEA (Abstract ID: 28371)

Puill-Stephan, E., Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute/Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology,

The branching coral Stylophora pistillata is one of the most abundant hermatypic corals
along the coasts of the Red Sea. It has been used for many years as a model species
for coral biological studies. To examine thermal stress and any mutation would occur in
Stylophora pistillata, we identified full-length sequence of Hsp 70 in samples of control
and other samples after exposure to 26°C for 24h and 31°C for 72h. Relative quantification of gene expression level was measured for Hsp 70 in all thermal stressed colonies.
Molecular modeling of Hsp 70 protein was made based on the ATP bound open
conformation. After submission the sequence of Hsp 70 gene from Stylophora pistillata,
GenBank assigned accession KP330265 for this sequence. Gene expression increased
at 26°C for 48h than of 24h. It decreased at 72h in contrast expression of gene at 29°C.
Gene expression decreased in 48h but increased in72h at high thermal stress of 31°C.
Molecular modeling demonstrates that even though many amino acid residues of Hsp
70 protein were mutated after exposure to heat stress, the resultant mutants did not lose
molecular interactions that might be necessary for protein stabilization and function.

DISTINCT BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES OCCUR ON CORALLINE ALGAE THAT
INDUCE HIGH CORAL SETTLEMENT. (Abstract ID: 30101)
Coral larvae must undergo a metamorphosis and settlement process in order to succeed
in colony formation and contribute to reef growth. Crustose coralline algae (CCA) are
known for their capacity to induce a metamorphic/settlement response in corals. CCAs
vary in their capacity to induce these responses but the identity and role of their respective bacterial biofilms is not well understood. We set out to characterize the bacterial
community of CCA species with different inductive capacities. Acropora millepora coral
larvae were exposed to four different CCAs in multiple-choice assays. The bacterial
communities of each CCA species were characterized by pyrosequencing of variable
regions V1-V3 of the 16S rRNA gene. Two of the CCAs accounted for three quarters
of all settlement. Despite all four CCA species sharing some bacterial groups, we found
unique bacterial groups associated with the two species with the highest inductive
2

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

capacity . This study is the first to implicate roles for these novel bacterial groups in coral
settlement. We will discuss our results in terms of the identity of these groups and their
possible role in the inductive capacity of the CCA-bacterial community consortia.

Informed management in the face of rising anthropogenic pressure has become a
priority for the sustainability of coastal fisheries in the Coral Triangle. Depauperate
information on pelagic larval duration and behavior presents a particular challenge to
understanding the scale of movement in many target reef species, particularly at the
boundaries of species’ ranges. In such cases, genetic analyses can illuminate dispersal
patterns. Schooling, reef-associated caesionids are heavily impacted in regions with
high artisanal fishing pressure. We collected tissue samples of Caesio cuning from five
localities in the apex of the species’ distribution to examine genetic connectivity along
~2000km of the Kuroshio Current from the Philippines to the northern extent of the
species range in the Ryukyu Islands. Individual samples were barcoded and genotyped
via RAD tags and the subsampled genomes were mined for a panel of SNPs to examine
(1) levels and direction of gene flow between and among sites in the Philippines and
Japan and (2) whether significant decreases in effective population size (Ne) at the limits
of the species range can be detected. Characterizing genetic signatures from sites proximal to strong ocean currents and from the core to the periphery of the species range
provides us with a clearer understanding of connectivity in C. cuning populations, helping
to inform optimal management strategy for this species.

gmail.com
yahoo.com

THE IMPACT OF PHILIPPINE MPA MANAGEMENT EFFORT ON HUMAN AND
SOCIAL CAPITAL AND VICE VERSA: ASSIGNING NON-USE VALUES TO REEFS
BEYOND ECONOMIC BENEFITS (Abstract ID: 29294)
Evidence strongly suggests that marine protected areas (MPAs) have the potential to
provide ecological and economic benefits while balancing the trade-offs that come with
stricter fisheries management measures. However, the effect of MPAs on social and human capital and MPAs’ other non-use values in the Philippines has only been minimally
explored. This study aims to determine and measure the impact of MPA management
efforts on these benefits at the Philippine municipal level. Relying on contingent valuation techniques in the absence of complete data on the impact of MPA management on
natural capital, this research aims to show the value that Philippine coastal society has
affixed unto reefs beyond their monetary and economic benefits. Using the Management Effectiveness Assessment Tool (MEAT) and the newly developed Socio-Economic
Assessment Tool (SEAT), the researchers compiled data on MPA management effort
(using the MEAT) and socio-economic benefits derived from the MPA (using the SEAT)
from focused group discussions with MPA managers. Taking data from 17 MPAs, it is
evident that social and human capital is high and well-distributed among stakeholder
communities along the coast; however, based on this study, this impact cannot be
directly attributed to management effort as of yet. Our research suggests some revisions
to the SEAT (e.g. on its leadership, social cohesion, education and health metrics) and
some parameters to consider when assigning value to Philippine coral reefs to improve
the social acceptability of protected areas.


COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF FORAGING BEHAVIOR REVEALS HIGH FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY AMONG CARIBBEAN PARROTFISHES (Abstract ID: 30085)
Herbivorous fish and sea urchins play a critical role in the resilience of coral reefs by
limiting harmful algae. The principal herbivores on many reefs are a diverse group of
fishes, which are responsible for different ecological processes (e.g., provisioning of
space for coral recruitment, bioerosion, the removal of macroalgae, etc.), and which
have complementary impacts on benthic communities. Classifying herbivorous fishes
into distinct functional groups based on their predicted impacts on reef ecosystems can
inform resilience-based management strategies. We analyzed the behavior, diets, and bite
mechanics of parrotfishes in the Florida Keys to document ecological diversity among
the dominant herbivores on many Caribbean reefs, and to classify these species into
functional groups. We found that in contrast to Pacific reefs, where most parrotfishes are
categorized as scrapers and excavators, parrotfishes on Caribbean reefs include representatives of four major herbivore functional groups: scrapers, excavators, macroalgae
browsers, and grazers. While fishes in different functional groups clearly have different
impacts on benthic communities, we also found that species in the same functional
group tended to select different habitats, feed from different substrates, and forage over
different spatial scales, suggesting high levels of complementarity within functional
groups, and implying that most species play a unique role in the ecosystem. By identifying key functional differences among parrotfishes, our results can inform management of
Caribbean reef ecosystems.

Achlatis, M., ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, University of Queensland,
van der Zande, R., ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, University of Queensland,
au
Dove, S., ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, University of Queensland, Australia,


PUTTING THE SUCCESS OF BIOERODING SPONGES ON FUTURE REEFS INTO
PERSPECTIVE: ENHANCED BIOEROSION VERSUS PHYSIOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS OF CLIONA ORIENTALIS (Abstract ID: 27934)
Excavating sponges –which are one of the major groups of bioeroders on the reef–
belong to the perceived winners under future climate scenarios. Ocean warming and
acidification have been shown to boost their bioerosion capacity, but it remains unclear
whether there are adverse physiological effects of these stressors that may counteract
the enhanced bioerosion on the long run. We exposed the aggressive photosymbiotic
bioeroder Cliona orientalis from the Great Barrier Reef to a prolonged temperature and
acidity rise (according to the IPCC predictions for end of the century summer conditions
under “business-as-usual” CO2 emissions). Subsequently we monitored the physiological response of the sponge, focusing on changes to its carbon budget and bioerosion
efficiency. Temperature stress resulted in extensive bleaching and occasional mortality,
suggesting a strong dependence of the sponge on its zooxanthellate symbiont. Increased
acidity alone did not have a profound effect on the sponge bioerosion or survival rates.
When combined, these stressors led to a significant reduction in the energetic budget of
the sponge, synergistically reducing rather than enhancing bioerosion rates. Overall this
study points towards an impaired physiology of the sponge under the changed conditions, leading to the hypothesis that although Cliona orientalis may be able to survive
future summers, its growth and bioerosion capacity will be substantially diminished.