better manage the MPAs in the BHS, which may be correlated to increasing values of
ecological outcomes. The findings of this study may help MPA managers and decision
makers developing better strategies and improving MPA management to effectively
achieve conservation objectives.

THE POTENTIAL FOR SUMATRA EARTHQUAKES AND TSUNAMI RECONSTRUCTION USING PORITES CORAL SKELETONS FROM SIMEULUE ISLAND,
The great (M 7-9) subduction-zone earthquakes have occurred along Sunda megathrust
during recent several hundred years. In Sumatra, Indonesia, two earthquakes occurred
on 26th Dec 2004 (M 9.2) and 28th Mar 2005 (M 8.7). These earthquakes triggered giant
tsunami, coseismic uplift and subsidence in the rupture area. Here we show the potential
for reconstruction of the coseismic events (uplift, subsidence and tsunami) using
geochemical analysis and skeletal microstructural observation in Porites coral skeletons
collected from Simeulue Island, Indonesia. Simeulue Island was reported that the northwest part uplifted max 145 cm in 2004 and the southeast part uplifted max 165 cm in
2005. Coseismic uplift and subsidence would change the light availability for reef corals,
which have the relationship with coral skeletal carbon isotope ratio. The tsunami would
also have influenced on habitat of reef building corals, it would caused by high turbidity
due to fling up sea bottom muddy sand and terrestrial runoff. We collected coral cores
at four sites of Simeulue Island in 2010. Coral annual extension rates in pre-earthquake
were significantly higher than that in post-earthquakes. At the northwest coral (uplifted
142 cm in 2004), the variation of skeletal carbon isotope ratios was characterized by
large amplitude after the earthquakes. Moreover, one of our coral specimens had a
characteristic band so-called green band, which corresponded to the timing of tsunami
occurrences. We propose that coral skeletons are the potential proxy for earthquake and
tsunami during several hundred years.


EXPRESSION PATTERN OF CYTOCHROME P450 AROMATASE GENE DURING
SPAWNING PERIOD IN ACROPORA TENUIS (Abstract ID: 28524 | Poster ID: 177)
Most scleractinians including Acropora species accumulate yolk into their oocytes during
spawning moon phase. It is considered that yolk accumulation (vitellogenesis) occurs
physiologically under stimulation of hormones and neurotransmitters, although it is
not fully understood how vitellogenesis is regulated endogenously. Cytochrome P450
aromatase is known as a rate-limiting enzyme converting androgen to estrogen and plays
a role in physiological processes in vitellogenesis of oviparous species. The present study
aimed to clone and characterize cytochrome P450 aromatase (atArom) cDNA of Acropora tenuis in Okinawa, Japan, and evaluate its expression during the spawning season
(May through July). The isolated cDNA clustered with aromatase of other invertebrates,
May and June. mRNA abundance of atArom in the samples from May through October
was measured using quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and was higher during the
pre-spawning period than during the post-spawning period. This expression pattern of
atArom mRNA is in agreement with the histological appearance of oocytes laden with
yolk in the polyp. It is concluded that estrogen (perhaps estradiol-17b) is closely related



DIFFERENCES IN CRYPTIC DIVERSITY AND HOST SPECIFICITY OF COPEPODS ASSOCIATED WITH STONY CORALS IN THE RED SEA (Abstract ID: 29154
| Poster ID: 67)
More than 340 species of Scleractinia-associated copepods (Crustacea) have been
described so far, but not from the Red Sea. They usually occur in multiple associations
and show a high degree of host specificity. We collected symbiotic copepods from 189
colonies of stony corals at 0.5-40 m depth in the south and the middle of the Saudi coast
of the Red Sea. We conducted an analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial markers (ITS &
COI) of (i) all morphotypes of copepods associated with 13 species in 9 genera of the
family Fungiidae and (ii) copepods of the genus Spaniomolgus (Poecilostomatoida) living
in association with Seriatopora hystrix and various morphotypes of Stylophora. The
detect independently evolving lineages that could be considered as representing different
species. Moreover, results of exploratory tests on phylogenetic comparative methods
will be presented to highlight the levels of association between species of copepods and
host corals.

THE IMPORTANCE OF HABITAT CONNECTIVITY AND PROTECTION ON NURSERY REEF FISHES IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29280)
Several studies on reef-associated fish species show evidence of ontogenetic habitat
shifts among seagrass beds, mangroves, and coral reefs during their life stages (nursery
species). In the Caribbean region, the availability of mangrove nursery grounds influenced the community structure and biomass of reef fishes in their adult stage. However,
information to demonstrate similar ecological processes underlying ontogenetic habitat
shift along the mangrove-reef habitat continuum has only started to accumulate in the
Indo-Pacific region. Here, we validate ontogenetic habitat shift by some reef fishes in the
Philippines based on their proximity to mangrove habitats and, hence, provide additional
data for the Indo-Pacific region. It attempts to verify the hypothesis that high biomass
with well-defined size structure may be attributed to a highly connected coral reef and
mangrove habitats through ontogeny. Further, the study aims to determine if there is
difference in community assemblage and biomass of these nursery species between
protected and unprotected reefs to show the benefits of protection in biodiversity conservation with value added information as regards the synergism between protection and
habitat connectivity. This study therefore highlights the contribution of this connectivity
to the coral reef fish species diversity in the Philippines widely acknowledged as the
center of high marine biodiversity in the world. Results of the study are discussed along
these lines of ecological framework.


LINKING MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE TO POSITIVE ECOLOGICAL
OUTCOMES IN THE RAJA AMPAT MARINE PROTECTED AREAS, INDONESIA
(Abstract ID: 29730 | Poster ID: 656)
An increasing number of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) has been established in the
last decade in response to threats such as overfishing and habitat destruction. However,
in order for MPAs to provide the ecological and social benefits they were designed for,
there must be effective management in place. Using quantitative methods, this study
investigates whether there were significant changes in fish biomass, fish size and percentage of hard coral cover in six MPAs in Raja Ampat, Indonesia. It further investigates
the relationship between management strategies and changes in these three ecological
indicators. A temporal analysis was carried out using baseline and repeat monitoring
156

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



GOOD GOVERNANCE INCREASES CORAL REEF RESILIENCE (Abstract ID: 28699)
Reef corals are declining worldwide due to local stressors and global climate change but
the ways these different factors interact to reduce coral abundance remain obscure. We
analyzed data from more than 35,000 surveys to document ecological changes on reefs
throughout the wider Caribbean from 1970 to 2012, and then compared local differences
in the status and trends of coral populations in relation to local differences in fishing
pressure, human population density, and thermal stress. Average coral cover declined by
half by 1990 with little subsequent decline, while macroalgal cover increased more than
three fold in the 1980s and early 1990s and has remained high. These early losses were
principally due to outbreaks of disease and overfishing a decade before the first regional
episodes of sustained thermal stress and coral bleaching. In contrast, more recent losses
of corals following extreme thermal stress varied among locations as a function of fishing pressure, the abundance of macroalgae, and concomitant susceptibility to disease.
These differences are strongly related to basic socioeconomic indicators with quality of
governance, GDP, and fishing regulations the most important factors. Our results support
the hypothesis that local protections can increase reef resilience in the short term pending global action on climate change.

MORE SHARKS, LESS FINS: ECOLOGICAL SUCCESSES AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC
CHALLENGES OF SPATIAL PROTECTION WITHIN THE WORLD’S BIGGEST
SHARK FISHERY (Abstract ID: 29472)
Despite the popularity of spatial closures as a tool to address conservation goals, little
is known about the effectiveness of shark-specific closures to protect sharks, or their
impacts on fisher behavior. Situated within the Coral Triangle, Indonesia’s shark fishery
contributes more to the international shark fin trade than any other nation. We assessed
shark diversity and abundance in an open access zone (OAZ) and two No-Take Zones
(NTZs) of a Marine Protected Area within the recently established shark sanctuary
in Raja Ampat, eastern Indonesia, where sharks have high monetary value. Shark
Across all management zones, neither zone size, depth nor reef complexity explained
variations in shark abundance, suggesting that governance is the main driver of successful shark conservation areas. Interviews with shark fishers showed that while most
fishers knew that sharks were protected in their former fishing grounds, few felt that the
agencies implementing fishing bans understood their livelihood needs. We found that
fishers adapted to the loss of fishing grounds by shifting fishing effort to other locations
or diversifying their livelihoods, including illegal petrol transport. While conserving sharks
for tourism can be effective, it may inadvertently result in displacing fishing effort to unprotected regions. We propose that where shark fisheries support important livelihoods,
effective shark conservation should combine strategic spatial protection with support for
livelihood diversification.


METABOLIC SCALING IN COLONIES: THE INFLUENCE OF INTEGRATION
(Abstract ID: 29117)
From single celled bacteria to complex multicelled vertebrates, intraspecific variation
in metabolism commonly scales allometrically, but with considerable variation. Here, I
investigate if and how scaling relationships in colonies vary with the degree of integration. Clones can live in different states: a loosely associated group, a highly integrated
colony, and eventually transition into a fully integrated individual. I hypothesized that
highly integrated colonies are more likely to exhibit standard metabolic scaling (allometric, with exponent = 3/4), as is observed in fully integrated individuals. Furthermore,
loosely associated groups of clones are more likely to scale isometrically (exponent=1)
because the addition of new clones should not affect the metabolism of the other group
members. The effect of colonial state on metabolic scaling was tested using ~100 taxa,
including Arthropods (24), Bacteria (7), Bryozoans (8), Chordates (9), Cnidarians (37),
Plants (4), and Protozoa (5). While colonial state and phyla are poor predictors of the
scaling exponent, the scaling exponent generally decreases with integration, from 0.97
+/- 0.08 in loosely associated groups, to 0.90 +/- 0.07 in highly integrated colonies, and
to 0.85+/-0.06 in fully integrated individuals. Thus, increases in integration are associated
with a shift from isometry to allometry. In theory, an increase in integration indicates a
transition in individuality, but integration is difficult to quantify. Thus, metabolic scaling
exponents can represent a continuous measure of a transition in individuality.


MANAGING NATURAL RESOURCES THROUGH VULNERABILITY ANALYSIS: AN
APPLIED CASE STUDY INTO RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES AT CORAL REEFS IN
PUERTO RICO (Abstract ID: 29683 | Poster ID: 589)
Coral reef related tourism and recreational activities rank among the most important
industries by providing jobs, supporting local economies, increasing visitor knowledge
of coral reefs, promoting pro-environmental values and helping to create a conservation ethic. However, research has demonstrated that marine recreational activities like
snorkeling and diving can also degrade coral reefs when visitors act inappropriately.
Damage to the reef is often the result of inappropriate behaviors of individuals and not
the industry. Given the current and expected growth in tourism and marine recreational
activities, the problem of recreationally-based damage to coral ecosystems can cause
significant damage. In Puerto Rico not enough is known about the type of stress recreationalists place on reefs, what management actions are available, or how effective they
will be at mitigating impacts. This presentation aims to share knowledge about these
areas by presenting a methodology developed to assess the vulnerability of select coral
reefs to recreational activities within La Cordillera Reserve, Puerto Rico.

Biologique de Roscoff, France
de Roscoff, France
Roscoff, France


EFFECTS OF ACUTE AND CHRONIC CHANGES IN SALINITY AND LIGHT ON
THE BLEACHING AND RECOVERY OF THE STAGHORN CORAL, ACROPORA
MILLEPORA (Abstract ID: 29902 | Poster ID: 360)

PHAGE THERAPY FOR DISEASED CORALS? POTENTIAL OF A NOVEL GIANT
VIRUS AS ANTIMICROBIAL AGENT AGAINST CORAL PATHOGENS (Abstract ID:
29296 | Poster ID: 164)

In this study, both acute and chronic tests were conducted to determine whether light
intensity and salinity triggered bleaching of coral, Acropora millepora. Five treatments of
light (0, 1000, 3000, 10000, and 30000 lux) and five treatments of salinity (20, 25, 30, 35
and 40 psu) levels were used. The results of the acute light intensity experiment revealed
under the highest salinity level (40 psu). In addition, the corals showed signs of tissue
slough-off. The results from the chronic tests showed that under light and salinity conditions, corals tended to have more tolerance than that of in the acute experiments. At the
end of the experiments, all experimented corals were brought to the normal condition
for a recovery. The results showed that bleached corals under the light experiments were
able to recover 100% while experimented corals under the salinity experiments were
not able to recover or had lower recovery rates. Moreover, from the molecular genetics
analysis, zooxanthellae found in all experimented corals both before and after the experiment trials were clad C1. Therefore, zooxanthellae clad may not play an important role
on susceptibility of the corals to the bleaching in this study.

Coral reefs are amongst the most biologically diverse and productive ecosystems on
Earth and provide economic goods and ecosystem services through fisheries and tourism.
The health of these fragile ecosystems is severely threatened by the combined effect of
anthropogenic pressure and global climate change. The increased surface water temperature and pollution have been associated with the development of diseases leading to the
demise of infected coral reefs. Extensive research is currently dedicated to characterizing
the causative agents of the coral disease and, in most of the case, the identified pathogens
are bacteria. It is however equally important to investigate procedures to cure and prevent
these infectious diseases. Over the past 5 years, the use of phages as biocontrol agents to
treat bacterial mediated disease has emerged as a promising tool to inhibit the progression
of coral infection but also its transmission to healthy counterparts. To further investigate
the usefulness of phage therapy, it is nowadays necessary to describe the biological traits
and ecological functioning of phages candidates. In this study, we isolated a novel giant
phage that specifically kills a causative agent of coral bleaching, Vibrio coralliilyticus.
We will present a genomic and functional analysis of this bacteriophage and discuss the
effectiveness of these parasites as therapeutic agents for diseased corals.
157

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


We applied an integrative approach to classify Ecuadorian species and here we will present preliminary data on the diversity of zoantharians present in the Marine Protected
Area “El Pelado” in the province of Santa Elena, Ecuador. Importantly a metabolomics
approach involving UHPLC-HRMS proved to be useful as a complementary tool for
their classification. A global comparison with well-known species of the Western part
of the Pacific (Okinawa) revealed very few similarities between zoantharians present in
both parts of this Ocean.


DIVERGENT REEF CARBONATE BUDGET TRAJECTORIES FOLLOWING A MAJOR CLIMATIC DISTURBANCE EVENT (Abstract ID: 28538 | Poster ID: 238)


Climate warming and associated increases in the frequency or intensity of stressors
is one of the greatest threats to coral-dominated tropical ecosystems. For example,
warm water events have caused major coral bleaching and associated mortality events,
and are predicted to do so with greater intensity and frequency. While the ecological
ramifications of such events have been widely explored, to date the geological and
geomorphological implications are poorly understood. Here, using a census based
technique, we track the biological carbonate budget of 21 reefs of the inner Seychelles
from 1994 to 2014, across the impact of the 1998 bleaching event, where up to 90%
of coral cover was lost. All reefs had a positive carbonate budget in 1994, but by 2005
all reefs had a negative budget. Reefs then followed two distinct trajectories: 14 reefs
remained in an erosional condition despite some increases in coral cover, while 7 reefs
regained a net positive budgetary state within 10 years of bleaching, and a similar budget
to pre-bleaching reefs by 2014. Using boosted regression trees, we identified that reefs
with no macroalgae, higher massive coral cover, low wave exposure and lower excavating parrotfish biomass (< 90kg/hectare) in 1994 were more likely to recover to a positive
budgetary state. While in 2014 the recovering reefs attained a similar positive budget to
1994, the present overall greater biomass of excavating parrotfish, increased macroalgal
cover and lower massive coral cover makes it unlikely that similar recovery trajectories
will occur after future bleaching events.

MOLECULAR PHYLOGEOGRAPHY AND POPULATION STRUCTURE OF BELIZEAN SEA CUCUMBERS (Abstract ID: 29693 | Poster ID: 54)
Sea cucumbers are fairly inconspicuous animals that live on the ocean floor and gain
nutrition from diatoms, bacteria, and detritus associated with the sediment they ingest.
Sea cucumbers perform vital ecosystem services by recycling nutrients and aerating the
upper sediment layers. The biology, ecology, and taxonomy of commercially exploited
sea cucumber species are poorly understood in Caribbean and Central American
countries where the bêche-de-mere fishery is fairly new and inconsistently regulated. We
report preliminary findings of sea cucumber species diversity and within species genetic
variation along the Belize Barrier Reef. We wish to determine the extent of genetic
variation in these exploited sea cucumber populations and the role MPA’s may play in
maintaining genetic diversity on the reef.
France
d’Océanographie, France

Instituto Nacional de Vías – INVIAS,
Financiera de Desarrollo Nacional – FDN,

RELOCATION OF CORALS AND ASSOCIATED FAUNA LOCATED IN THE
DREDGING AREA OF THE ACCESS CHANNEL TO CARTAGENA BAY (Abstract ID:
29764 | Poster ID: 437)

THE 26 YEARS OLD CAPTIVE REEF KEPT AT THE MONACO’S OCEANOGRAPHIC MUSEUM (Abstract ID: 29443 | Poster ID: 480)

In order to mitigate the environmental impacts due to the implementation of deepening
dredge in the access channel to Cartagena bay (Colombia), the Environmental Management Plan approved involved the relocation of 8,725 individuals belonging to 15 marine
species of ecological importance in the area. Among the relocated species, it was found
corals, antipatharians, sponges, sea urchins and fish. Within six months of moving the
fauna and by the repeated measures analysis of variance, it was established that the
areas where the fauna was entered have not suffered a statistically significant change in
biotic and abiotic cover (p> 0.05) but it does have for algal cover and density of invertebrates and fish (p <0.05). This significance was given by the increase in density at the six
months monitoring compared to that found at the one month monitoring after the relocation. This pattern in density may be related to the increased availability of food, since
most of the observed organisms feed on algae, which increased their coverage. In addition, within six months of the relocating process the corals and sponges have a survival
percentage of 86% for the former and 57% for the latter. The results obtained indicate
that the actions implemented to mitigate the impact of dredging on this ecosystem in the
area were appropriate, ensuring the survival of more than 50% of individuals that were
moved without alter in an ecological way the habitats to which they were entered.

The Monaco’s Oceanographic Museum harbors one of the (and perhaps the) oldest
captive reefs in the world. This reef was set up in 1989. It was made of live stones, live
sand and live corals as well as fishes collected in the Gulf of Tajoura (Djibouti, Indian
Ocean), shipped to Monaco and used to stock a 40,000 liters semi-closed aquarium. The
aquarium is almost entirely ecologically balanced (JAUBERT NNR SYSTEM). The hard
corals (massive, branching and foliose species) have built a life size patch. The patch,
which is still thriving today after 26 years of uninterrupted development, is as beautiful as
the most beautiful coral patch that one can see in nature. Therefore, while coral reefs are
under heavy pressures because of overexploitation, pollution, global warming and ocean
acidification, this successful experiment opens interesting prospects of ex situ conservation. By multiplying examples of this kind in public aquariums one might contribute to
make an increasing number of people undoubtedly sensitive to the importance and
beauty of coral reefs and to the need to conserve them.


TWO NMFS CONSULTATION CASE STUDIES IN PACIFIC AND CARIBBEAN
CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS TO AVOID AND MINIMIZE CORAL REEF IMPACTS
(Abstract ID: 30114)
water resource development projects proposed along the coast. A growing interest in
renewable energy production and telecommunication installations in the Pacific and
Caribbean Islands has led to a number of permit applications for new types of projects
that include construction offshore. The first case study, the Honolulu Air Conditioning
Project, is an example of an innovative renewable energy project that proposes to draw
cold water from deep offshore waters and pipe it to land to help generate air conditioning for buildings in downtown Honolulu. Resource agencies were concerned about the
associated proposed discharge of very large amounts of the cold, nutrient-rich return
water to the nearshore coral reef environment. Through early consultation with the
permitting entities and natural resource agencies the applicant redesigned the project
to discharge return water in deep waters outside the depth range of coral reef habitat.
The second case study focuses on two sites in San Juan, Puerto Rico, that are hubs for
submarine cable projects connecting the Caribbean, South America, and the continental
standard conditions for submarine cable projects due to the increase in submarine cable

AN ASSESSMENT OF THE DIVERSITY OF ZOANTHARIANS FROM ECUADOR
Zoantharians (Cnidaria, Order Zoantharia) represent a group of marine invertebrates
that are distributed from shallow waters to the deep sea worldwide. They are especially
diverse and abundant in the rocky reefs of the Pacific Ocean and, as such, they are key
elements of the marine biodiversity shaping ecosystems in these areas. Few reports on
the diversity present of the mainland coast of South America and especially of the coast
of Ecuador exist despite its high interest as a zone of confluence of two main Pacific
currents. The taxonomy of zoantharians is highly challenging due to a lack of clear morphological characters and in recent years, molecular techniques have helped clarify high
level-taxonomic relationships within the order. However, many issues remain at species
level due to the limited resolution of the DNA markers commonly used. In this context,
the use of a metabolomics approach shows promise to help distinguish closely related
morphotypes in related temperate zoantharians and especially amongst Zoanthus spp.
158

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

and other parameters. The U-4000 performed reasonably well on various operations
such as diving, climbing and mosaicking at sites with weak currents (<0.5 m/sec), but
having difficulty of moving against strong currents. Further enhancements of the vehicle
are ongoing. A preliminary analysis indicates that the sensor data were in good agreement with sample data. For the two shelf edge sites in the vicinity of the Oculina HAPC
and within the Gulf Stream frontal zone, the pH, pCO2, and aragonite saturation state
(omega) all show a wide range of values with pH from 8.07 to 7.96, pCO2 from 300 to
600 μatm, and the omega from 4.0 to 2.4 from surface to bottom.

under the Endangered Species Act, and the importance of shallow and mesophotic
reef systems as fishery and coral habitat along many cable routes. Standard conditions
related to survey methods to establish temporary anchorage areas and site the cable
routes in shallow and deep water and cable laying requirements to minimize potential
coral impacts have been developed. The outcomes of these consultations have led to a
reduction in damage to coral resources, while allowing economic growth to continue in


EMPLOYING SOFTWARE ENGINEERING PRINCIPLES TO ENHANCE ANALYSIS
OF CORAL REEF DATABASES (Abstract ID: 29768)
In order to answer questions in a coral reef context, we have created a framework that
reduces the overhead of continual data preparation and allows more time and resources
for scientific inquiry. Directly employing software engineering principles, this framework
improves data access, connectivity, and scalability with consideration for privacy and
security by introducing an abstraction between the data management layer and the application layer. Using the software repository pattern, this solution offers a decentralized
data service for use with minimal up-front data processing. In our presentation we will
use this framework to analyze a complex data set consisting of twenty corals and seventeen environmental factors collected at fifty reef sites over a span of four years. One goal
is to determine if the presence of a particular coral facilitates growth of other coral species and recruits. Using our software framework we are able to look at the incomplete
data and expose how much of the picture is missing. Furthermore, this platform allows
us to exhaustively search the space of coral associations and test all relationships. This
yields statistically significant evidence that one coral species is conducive to growth and
recruitment of other species in the Caribbean. We argue that much of the success in
answering this and other complex ecological questions stems from our robust data management framework which will allow us to evaluate the potential implications of species
and environmental associations on a larger scale to address coral resilience.

A GALNAC-BINDING LECTIN COULD BE INVOLVED IN ACQUISITION OF
SYMIODINIUM BY ACROPORA TENUIS (Abstract ID: 29382 | Poster ID: 118)
Many corals often harbor symbiotic dinoflagellates, Symbiodinium spp., and their symbiosis is indispensable for the survival of corals. However, they often acquire Symbiodinium
around their environment, and this acquisition was inhibited by some carbohydrates, suggesting that a carbohydrate binding proteins may play a role in this step. So we purified a
by MALDI-TOF MS spectrometry suggests that 29.0 kDa component is similar to a
GalNAc/GlcNAc binding lectin tachylectin-2 (TL-2) purified from a horseshoe crab,
which is involved in immunity. Based on the sequence, the corresponding cDNA was
cloned. The deduced amino acid sequence was composed of 267 amino acids, and had
may acquire Symbiodinium near themselves by releasing AtTL-2 from nematocysts.



FUSION OF CORAL EMBRYOS: A POTENTIAL AND UNEXPECTED SHORTCUT
TO COLONY FORMATION (Abstract ID: 28590)

UNUSUAL FEATURES OF A MESOPHOTIC HARD CORAL ASSEMBLAGE IN A
LAGOON ENVIRONMENT DOMINATED BY HEAVY TERRIGENOUS SEDIMENTATION: THE BANC GAIL (SW NEW CALEDONIA). (Abstract ID: 28630)

Juvenile coral colonies originate either from the asexual budding of the primary polyp,
or fusion of gregariously settling larvae and adjoining recruits. Here, we observed for the
first time the inborn juvenile colonies resulting from fusion of embryos and the following
settlement of conjoined larvae in a broadcast spawning reef coral Platygyra daedalea.
We hypothesize that fusion of coral embryos might be a potential and unexpected shortcut to colony formation, and meanwhile an adaptive strategy to form pre-metamorphic
chimeric larvae and larger recruits in reef corals, thereby promoting early survival. Future studies are required to explore whether fusion of embryos is common in broadcast
spawning corals and occurs in the field, and fully evaluate its implications.

Mesophotic coral assemblages are most often developed on the deep fore reef slopes
exposed to oceanic conditions. Less common are the mesophotic assemblages which
occasionally occur within the confines of large lagoons where environmental conditions
impart specific and unusual characters to the scleractinian community. Situated in the
SW lagoon of the New Caledonian barrier reef system, the Banc Gail is an example
of such uncommon mesophotic environment. There, between 35 and 45m deep, the
lagoon floor is subjected to input in the form of periodical pulses of fine terrigenous mud
originating from the nearby rivers. The terrigenous silts and clays are trapped in an eddy
of the general water circulation and settle on the seabed. Such a turbid environment
favours the settlement of oysters forming banks that tends to create ridges up to 3 m
high on which corals settle, separated by muddy gullies Although high levels of fine
particle sedimentation are proven to be detrimental to the development of scleractinians, a number of corals have adapted to such peculiar conditions, principally low light
levels and high rates of fine sediment deposition. The composition of the scleractinian
assemblage is examined. Although the suite of species is a subset of the general scleractinian mesophotic fauna, some key components such as the Agariciidae or species of
the Acropora elegansgroup are uncommon or absent. Further, most species show unusual
growth forms in response to the high and periodic muddy particle ingress and a high
incidence of natural fluorescence has also been observed


MEASUREMENTS OF UNDERWATER CARBONATE CHEMISTRY USING A PROTOTYPE HYBRID AUV/ROV AND AUTOMATIC SENSORS: A DEMONSTRATION
PROJECT (Abstract ID: 29903)
Knowledge of deep-water carbonate chemistry remains limited, largely due to the
limitations of observational capabilities. Here we present results from a 6-day (Aug. 8-13,
2015) survey along the east coast of Florida using a new hybrid AUV/ROV U-4000
outfitted with state of the art biochemical sensors, and a high-definition imaging system.
The U-4000 is a flat rectangular platform designed to operate in an autonomous mode
or a supervised autonomy mode using a self-spooling, fiber-optic tether. In this project,
the vehicle was outfitted with CTD, SAMI-pH, HydroC pCO2, and DO sensors to
characterize the carbonate chemistry and water conditions. The pCO2 and pH sensors
sampled at 1 and 5 min. interval, respectively. The vehicle was deployed 11 times at 6
dive sites from nearshore (~15 m) to shelf edge (~75m). Nine CTD casts were made
with a mini-rosette to collect water samples for measurements of total CO2, alkalinity,


JUVENILE HAWKSBILL AND GREEN SEA TURTLE MOVEMENT BETWEEN
SEAGRASS BEDS, CORAL REEFS AND ARTIFICIAL REEFS IN BREWERS BAY, US
VIRGIN ISLAND (Abstract ID: 29801)
The movement patterns of juvenile sea turtle is one of the largest gaps in our understanding of these endangered/threatened animals. Movement patterns of juvenile

159

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

increased energetic demands are unlikely to be met by adequate production at lower
trophic levels, as smaller prey species are often the first to decline in response to climateinduced loss of live coral and structural complexity. Consequently, ubiquitous increases
in energy demand combined with reduced foraging opportunity due to climate change
will increase top-down competition for a dwindling biomass of prey, and potentially
distort entire food webs and associated fisheries.

hawksbill Eretmochelys imbricata and green sea turtles Chelonia mydas were analyzed
for a period from Aug 1, 2015 to Nov 1, 2015 as part of the UVI’s Mare Nostrum project.
The project deployed 37 Vemco acoustic receivers in Brewers Bay St Thomas, Virgin
Islands. Five hawksbills, 1.4–28.2kg, and five green sea turtles, 9.5-16.4kg, were tagged
beds and nights spent in both artificial and coral reefs. The high degree of site fidelity
suggests that individuals have specific resting areas where they overnight. All green sea
turtles stayed within the approximate 1 km2 area covered by the acoustic array, suggesting home ranges of less than 1 km2. No significant correlation between mass and
home range was found in Green sea turtles. Hawksbills showed no obvious circadian
movement patterns. Larger Hawksbills had wider movement patterns, suggestive of a
correlation between size and home range. Both Hawksbill and Green sea turtles spent
more time associated with the artificial reef, extension of St Thomas airport runway,
then with natural coral reefs in the Brewers Bay. This data suggest that home ranges
of juvenile Hawksbill and Green sea turtles are smaller than that of adult sea turtles
reported in the literature.


SAVING THE “CRITTER CAPITAL” THROUGH SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOOD
INITIATIVES (Abstract ID: 29611 | Poster ID: 685)
St. Vincent and the Grenadines(SVG) is promoted to dive enthusiasts as the ‘Critter
Capital’ of the world and is home to the smallest coral reef creatures. Since the lionfish
invaded SVG’s waters in 2010, fishers and divers noted the negative impact on coral reef
fish; a problem that may lead to a critter crisis. SVG is currently establishing a second
marine park and the possible disenfranchisement of fishers is of critical concern since
the majority of the population depends on the marine environment for their income and
diet. In order to address the lionfish invasion and provide fishers with supplementary
livelihoods options, a sustainable livelihoods initiative was implemented by the Climate
Resilient Eastern Caribbean Marine Managed Areas Network (ECMMAN) project. The
project was implemented jointly by two dive shops and two fisher organizations. The
project outcomes included the certification of 25 fishers in diving and training in lion fish
culling methodologies with permission to catch lionfish within the proposed MMA; the
establishment of a tackle shop with lionfish culling equipment; the promotion of lionfish
consumption; and stable markets for lionfish sales. The project has recorded many
benefits including (i) reduction in lionfish populations, (ii) rebounded populations of reef
critters, (iii) establishment of a secure lionfish market through restaurants and hotels, (iv)
improved partnerships and communication among dive shops and fisher organizations,
and (v) the demonstration of a successful sustainable livelihood initiative in a small
island state.


FLUCTUATIONS IN ORNAMENTAL FISH POPULATIONS AFTER THE MASSIVE
DIE-OFF OF CORAL IN 1997 ON THE PADANG SHELF REEF SYSTEM, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 29257)
Ornamental fish communities are part of the reef fish community associated with coral
reef ecosystems. They are exported from Indonesia for the aquarium trade. Surveys
of reef fish has been conducted continuously on the reefs off Padang, West Sumatra,
Indonesia before and after the occurrence of massive die off of coral in 1997. Surveys
were conducted again in May 2014 to see the change in fish populations at permanent
and Sipakal). This report concentrates on changes in the ornamental fish populations
since the die off. The species and number of individuals per species were recorded 2.5
m either side of three 30 m transects at each site. Twenty four families of ornamental
fish from the low to the high demand, were recorded which the highest demand including Chaetodontidae, Pomacanthidae, Achanturidae Balistidae Achanturus Leucosternon
Pomacentridae and 7 species. The following species were the most abundant: 3,17% of
Pomacentrus alleni on the high demand, 58,57% of Odonus niger on the middle demand
and 8,42 of Abudefduf vaigiensis on the low demand. The results obtained by the average number of species of fish as much as 41,5 and the average number of population of
682,92 individual fish. The number of species and number of individuals of ornamental
fish was higher in 2014 than in 2007 and lower than in 2001. The mass death of corals
impacts the number of species and individuals of ornamental fish or reef fish in the
waters of the Municipality of Padang and surrounding areas. Keywords: Ornamental fish,
reef fish communities, fluctuations, mass death of corals


HIERARCHICAL EFFECTS OF THE ENVIRONMENT ON THE DISTRIBUTION
Scarine labrids (parrotfishes) are critical to the resistance of reefs from shifting to a
macroalgal dominated state on reefs worldwide. Despite their importance, few studies
have investigated the community structure of parrotfishes on the Great Barrier Reef at
large spatial scales. The distribution of 25 parrotfish species was examined at 82 sites on
the Northern Great Barrier Reef from north of Cape Tribulation to Cairns, representing
spatial scales both cross-shelf and along a 6 degree longitudinal gradient. Parrotfish and
predator abundance was recorded using stereovideo cameras to facilitate consistently
accurate length measurements for all species encountered. Total predator biomass (kg
/ Ha) and parrotfish biomass (kg /Ha) were calculated at each site. To investigate their
role in parrotfish community structure, coral cover, slope and rugsoty were also quantified at each site. Similarly to previous studies (Hoey & Bellwood 2008), clear patterns
emerged in abundance and biomass of parrotfish on a cross-shelf gradient. As distance
from shore increased parrotfish densities increased, while total parrotfish biomass
increased. Patterns of variation in community structure were difficult to distinguish at a
larger 6 degree longitude spatial scale. Despite the increase in biomass of parrotfish from
inshore to the outer shelf, the majority of biomass is represented by a smaller diversity
of species.



LARGE PREDATORY CORAL TROUT SPECIES UNLIKELY TO MEET INCREASING
ENERGETIC DEMANDS IN A WARMING OCEAN (Abstract ID: 28362)
Increased ocean temperature due to climate change is raising metabolic demands and
energy requirements of marine ectotherms. If productivity of marine systems and
fisheries are to persist, individual species must compensate for this demand through
increasing energy acquisition or decreasing energy expenditure. Here we reveal that the
most important coral reef fishery species in the Indo-west Pacific, the large predatory
coral trout Plectropomus leopardus (Serranidae), can behaviourally adjust food intake to
maintain body-condition under present day (24-30°C) and elevated (+3°C) temperatures,
and acclimate over time to consume larger meals. However, 3°C elevated temperatures
also caused a 55% reduction in spontaneous swimming speeds and doubled the time
individuals spend resting motionless on the bottom. Given that movement and activity
patterns of large mobile species are directly related to prey encounter rates and ability to
capture prey, any reductions in activity patterns are likely to reduce foraging opportunity and limit the energy available for growth, reproduction and fitness. Additionally,

SUCCESSES, CHALLENGES, AND LESSONS LEARNED FROM A DECADE OF
CAPACITY BUILDING FOR IMPROVING THE MANAGEMENT OF MARINE PROTECTED AREAS (Abstract ID: 29753)
With some 9,000 Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) designated globally (Spalding et al,
2013), only a small fraction of these are considered effectively protected. At the same
time with the array of capacity development programs offered around the globe, there is
now more than ever the need to assess the progress made by marine resource managers
in meeting their management objectives; establish and set staff competency standards;
and communicate results in terms of the return on these investments. NOAA’s International MPA Capacity Building Team strives to improve marine and coastal resource
management by bring together different MPA management models from around the
world and sharing experiences and lessons learned amongst marine and coastal re-

160

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

source managers. After a over a decade of work, we have developed a successful model
for improving the capacity of coastal and marine area managers to ensure successful
management. As part of this, we recognize a key element in comparing the success of
capacity building program is ensuring there’s a standardized means for defining what are
we trying to achieve as well as outlining common benchmarks for “success”. Additionally,
we need to consider standardizing indicators of success. A systematized set of standards
and indicators for results-based capacity development would provide a means to measure and compare the effectiveness of capacity development efforts across a region and
globally in moving towards effective marine and coastal area management.

CONNECTIVITY AMONG POPULATIONS OF THE INVASIVE LIONFISH
(Abstract ID: 28211)
Lionfish have recently invaded Atlantic waters beginning in the North Atlantic in the
late 1980s progressing into the Caribbean in 2006 and into the Gulf of Mexico (GOM)
as of 2010. We investigated the population genetic connectivity of the invasion across
these three regions. Previous studies found that there are 9 mitochondrial control region
(d-loop) haplotypes found in samples from the North Atlantic region (ATL) and that the
Caribbean (CAR) region has only a subset of those haplotypes (n = 4). Our samples
from the Gulf of Mexico contain only three haplotypes. It is clear from these samples
that there were founder effects within each region as they were successively colonized
and possible slight barriers to dispersal among the three regions (ATL, CAR, GOM). It
is clear from our data that the GOM was colonized by dispersers from the CAR rather
than the ATL as there is no evidence of the ATL only haplotypes in the Gulf samples.
Understanding the genetic composition and patterns of connectivity of lionfish will help
aid in multi-agency management efforts to control lionfish populations and the further
spread of lionfish.


CORAL COMMUNITY CHANGE ON A TURBID-ZONE REEF COMPLEX: DEVELOPING BASELINE RECORDS FOR THE CENTRAL GREAT BARRIER REEF’S
NEARSHORE CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 27950)
Understanding past coral community development and reef growth is crucial for placing
contemporary ecological and environmental change within appropriate reef-building
timescales. Coral reefs located within coastal inner-shelf zones are widely perceived to
be most susceptible to declining water quality due to their proximity to modified river
catchments. On the inner-shelf of Australia’s Great Barrier Reef (GBR) the impacts
remain unclear. This relates to ongoing debates concerning the significance of increased
sediment yields against the naturally high background sedimentary regimes and the
paucity of long-term (>decadal) ecological datasets. To provide baseline records for
interpreting coral community change within the turbid inner-shelf waters of the GBR,
21 cores were recovered from five nearshore reefs spanning an evolutionary spectrum
of reef development. Discrete intervals pre- and post-dating European settlement, but
deposited at equivalent water depths, were identified by radiocarbon dating, enabling
the discrimination of extrinsic and intrinsic driven shifts within the coral palaeo-record.
We report no discernible evidence of anthropogenically-driven disturbance on the coral
community records at these sites. Instead, significant transitions in coral community
assemblages relating to water depth and vertical reef accretion were observed. We suggest that these records may be used to contextualise observed contemporary ecological


A SUSTAINABLE REPOSITORY FOR CORAL REEF HISTORICAL IMAGERY
(Abstract ID: 29369)
Underwater photographs of known reef sites are valuable sources of historical data. As
part of a new initiative to create a sustainable, open-access repository of historical reef
imagery and associated data, a collection of 1480 images made by Eileen Graham in the
reefs prior to their decline in the 1980s and before well-established monitoring surveys in
the Caribbean. Images range from detailed close-ups to reefscapes, and are a rich source
of ecological data including benthic community composition and habitat complexity.
Ecological change on coral reefs shows great variability at local scales, thus we aim to
establish a network of image repositories from reefs worldwide to help define local baselines that better inform decision-makers. The time is right because the first generation of
SCUBA-enabled scientists are retired and should be considering the future disposition
of their photographs. Our experience with assembling this collection indicates that it
is critical to work closely with photographers to capture information on dive sites and
dates. Furthermore, we would like to highlight the role of natural history museums as
sustainable repositories of historical archives. In contrast to short-term projects, museums are better able to guarantee future availability of reef imagery because they have
the long-term commitment and resources required for the curation and dissemination of
scientific data.


VULNERABILITY OF PACIFIC REEF-DEPENDENT COMMUNITIES TO OCEAN
ACIDIFICATION: FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOOD IMPLICATIONS (Abstract
ID: 28429)


In the Pacific region, coral reefs provide critical goods and services for coastal communities, particularly food security, livelihoods and coastal protection. The implications
of ocean acidification (OA) are significant due to the expected impacts of OA on reef
structure and fish productivity. Combined, these impacts present a major challenge for
reef-dependent communities. Here we present the results of an assessment of vulnerability of reef-dependent communities in 22 Pacific island countries and territories
(PICTs) that focused on the projected impacts of OA in 2050 on reefs and their goods
and services. In particular, we examined fisheries production for food security, livelihood
income, employment and reef area as a proxy for coastal protection. The semi-quantitative assessment used indicators to score and rank communities based on their: (i) exposure to reef habitat degradation, (ii) sensitivity to declines in reef goods and services, and
(iii) adaptive capacity as measured by social indicators of health, education, economy
size and governance. The PICTs assessed with the highest relative vulnerability were:
Solomon Islands, Kiribati, PNG, FSM, Tonga and Tuvalu. The PICTs with the lowest
relative vulnerability were: Niue, Northern Mariana Islands, Tokelau, New Caledonia and
Guam. Key factors contributing to high vulnerability were large reef to land area ratio, a
high percentage of household earnings from coastal fisheries, and education as a driver
of low adaptive capacity. In contrast, PICTs with low relative vulnerability consistently
had high adaptive capacity and generally low reef to land ratios. These results are
informing future adaptation planning.

TURFS OF THE FUTURE: GLOBAL CHANGE IMPACTS ON BIOLOGICAL AND
COMMUNITY RESPONSES OF CORAL REEF TURF ALGAE (Abstract ID: 28860)
Coral reef algae are critically important for organic and inorganic production in tropical
systems, yet they are markedly understudied in the context of global change. Within the
algae, even less is known about the response of turf algae communities to environmental stressors. We conducted a mesocosm experiment in Moorea, French Polynesia to
test the combined effects of CO2 enrichment and warming temperatures on turf growth,
physiology, community structure and endolithic growth. These metrics relate to the roles
of turf algae in production, competition, and as a resource for herbivores. Carbonate
plugs covered by turf were collected from the reef and exposed to ambient and elevated
CO2 (1,000 µatm) conditions for three weeks. Each CO2 treatment was replicated
sometimes interactive, effects on turf algae response. OA stimulated growth of both turf
algae and the endolithic community, but more so at warmer temperatures. Conversely,
temperature alone stimulated photosynthetic production and respiration. OA and warming also altered community structure, with a shift towards dominance by cyanobacteria
in warmer and more acidic conditions. These results indicate that global change impacts
could enhance the competitive ability of turf algae over other slower growing taxa such
as reef-building corals. The complex and differing effects of CO2 enrichment and warming across a suite of algal responses demonstrate how multiple stressors have diverse
and unexpected biological effects.

161

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


mitochondrial and nuclear datasets indicating that there is not rampant hybridization or
introgression between mitochondrial lineages.

TEN YEARS OF LARGE SCALE CORAL BLEACHING MONITORING ACROSS THE
FLORIDA REEF TRACT (Abstract ID: 28876)


The Florida Reef Resilience Program (FRRP) is a collaborative effort among managers,
scientists, conservation organizations and reef users to develop resilience based management strategies for coping with climate change and other stresses on Florida’s coral
reefs. Since 2005, The Nature Conservancy has coordinated a Disturbance Response
Monitoring (DRM) effort, consisting of a probabilistic sampling design and a stony coral
condition monitoring protocol, implemented during peak thermal stress across the entire
Florida Reef Tract that extends from Martin County to the Dry Tortugas. Each year,
13 teams from federal, state, and local government agencies, non-profit organizations,
and universities completed surveys across the entire South Florida reef tract within a
six to eight week period. Sites were stratified randomly, allowing information gathered
on the coral population’s size frequency, size structure, and bleaching prevalence to be
extrapolated for different sub-regions and zones. From 2005 to 2015, 2,200 surveys were
completed. Results from these ten years of surveys show spatial and temporal patterns
in coral bleaching and colony size frequency distribution, indicating that some reef areas
or coral species may be more resilient to stress than others. While the causes of this
variability remain poorly quantified, projected increases in coral bleaching due to climate
change makes identification of these resilient reef areas and species important for longterm coral reef conservation and future management strategies.

VALIDATION OF REEF-SCALE THERMAL STRESS SATELLITE PRODUCTS FOR
CORAL BLEACHING MONITORING (Abstract ID: 28114)
Satellite monitoring of thermal stress on coral reefs has become an essential component
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Coral Reef Watch (NOAA CRW)
program provides daily global monitoring at 5 km resolution—at or near the scale of
most coral reefs. This and other novel CRW products may provide crucial information in
support of local monitoring and management activities prior to, during, and after thermal
stress events. Using in situ survey data collected during the 2014 thermal stress event
across the Northern Mariana Islands, we undertook the first quantitative comparison
between 5 km satellite monitoring products and coral bleaching observations. Observed
bleaching at 62 sites across seven islands ranged from 0%–94% of live coral cover.
Analysis of coral community characteristics, historical temperature conditions, and
current thermal stress revealed a strong influence of coral biodiversity on the patterns
of observed bleaching. This resulted in a model based on thermal stress and generic
richness that explained 97% of the variance in bleaching. These findings illustrate the
importance of using local benthic community characteristics to predict and interpret the
level of impact from thermal stress exposure. In an era of continuing climate change, accurate monitoring of thermal stress and prediction of coral bleaching and resilience are
essential for managers to utilize resources effectively and conserve coral reefs.


3D PHOTOGRAMMETRY FOR MEASURING REEF PRODUCTIVITY: ADVANCES
IN LIGHT PROPAGATION AND SELF-OCCLUSION (Abstract ID: 28381)
With recent advances in photographic 3D benthic mapping, it is now possible to build
high-resolution 3D maps of benthic ecosystems over large spatial areas that will allow us
to address the importance of 3D reef structure for community metabolism. Using stereoscopic photogrammetry and scene reconstruction, the distribution and approximate
surface areas of most stationary members of the community can be obtained. As light
is the major short-term control on reef productivity, we propose to generate a model
of received light over the surface of the reconstructed community. The key technical
advance proposed here in underwater 3D reconstruction is the use of multi-view stereo
to improve both the spatial density and accuracy of the 3D structure of the structural
models, building on previously developed 2-view methods. This multi-view formulation, in conjunction with more sophisticated models for light propagation through water,
will enable us to both measure light in its capacity as a driver for reef metabolism and
generate more accurate 3D models of the reefs for all manner of study. Results will be
displayed on real data gathered from a mixed coral-algal reef in the Florida Keys.



LONG-TERM MONITORING OF CORAL ASSEMBLAGES IN FLOWER GARDEN
BANKS NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARY, GULF OF MEXICO (Abstract ID: 28368
| Poster ID: 13)
The Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary, consisting of East Flower Garden
Bank (EFGB), West Flower Garden Bank (WFGB), and Stetson Bank, contains coral
reefs and coral communities in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico. Long-term monitoring
programs have been conducted at EFGB and WFGB since 1989 and at Stetson Bank since
1993. We examined 27 years of shallow (<33.5 m) benthic percent cover data at EFGB
and WFGB, providing a long-term trend analysis of the community structure. Although
percent macroalgae cover has increased significantly, mean coral cover averaged above
50%. In contrast to many other phase shifting reefs in the Caribbean region, the increase
benthic monitoring at Stetson Bank has documented three community shifts (2000, 2006,
and 2015). In this 23 year time frame, both sponge and coral cover declined, macroalgae
cover varied widely, and the reef has been impacted by bleaching, hurricane damage, and
land-based runoff. The highly variable environmental conditions at Stetson Bank differ
largely due to Stetson’s more northern latitude and closer proximity to shore. Continued
long-term monitoring documents changes in the reef communities at the marine sanctuary,
enabling resource managers to make decisions regarding management and research activities focused on the dynamics of the benthic communities and the megafauna they support.

(Abstract ID: 28840)
Pocillopora corals are notoriously difficult to identify and recent work has found more
cryptic species and plasticity than preciously thought, motivating a reorganization of the
genus. Here, we analyze the phylogenetic relationships within the scleractinian genus
Pocillopora using RAD-seq. We examined 15 coral holobiont libraries and found strong
concordance in both the phylogenetic analyses of the entire holobiont dataset and
reads that mapped to transcribed coral genes. We further assembled nearly complete
mitochondrial genomes (18 kb), a 5 kb segment of histone gene sequence, and 430
unlinked, biallelic SNPs, which also show general concordance with previously published
clustering of the mitochondrial clades rather than the currently recognized morphospecies. This analysis expands on previous genetic, morphologic, and ecological studies
and corroborates that Pocillopora have more variable and convergent morphology than
previously appreciated. Our data provide unprecedented phylogenetic resolution into
the recent radiation of species within this genus, with general concordance between
162

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


been given to how communities respond to MPA, particularly how they can actively
participate in the management of their marine resources, following the establishment of
a restrictive collaborative management regime. In this paper, we explore the early effects
of a MPA geared towards the management of marine resources as well as possibilities
of combining Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management to communities current
fisheries management practice. To illustrate our case, we draw upon our research experience in social, fisheries and biological assessment and our experience in establishing
to Fisheries Management, Community based Marine Resources Management

GENETIC AND BIOPHYSICAL MODELING ASSESSMENT OF CONNECTIVITY IN
THE RED GROUPER, EPINEPHELUS MORIO (Abstract ID: 29516)
Understanding connectivity of reef organisms is important to aid the conservation of
biological diversity and facilitate sustainable fisheries. Common methods to assess reef
connectivity include genetics, modeling, and tagging. Individually, these techniques can
offer insight into population structure; however, the information acquired by a singular
analysis is often subject to inherent limitations of the chosen method. Thus combining
approaches may allow for better resolution of population structure and the biophysical
factors driving it. We utilized both genetic analysis and biophysical modeling to assess
connectivity dynamics and linkages of the red grouper (Epinephelus morio), a major
reef fishery species found throughout the Gulf of Mexico (GOM) and southeastern USA
(SE-USA). First, we used a model to incorporate ocean conditions and biotic traits of
the grouper to deliver a spatial forecast of ‘source’ and ‘sink’ populations in the GOM
and SE-USA spanning ten years. Next, using a suite of 13 polymorphic microsatellite
markers we assessed the genetic population structure of red grouper across this same
spatial scale to directly compare levels of connectivity between methods. Our population genetic survey of groupers suggested high connectivity and the presence of a single
genetic population. Similarly, modelling the fish over ten years suggested panmixia over
generations. Using a dual empirical and theoretical approach lessens error over one
method alone and is important validation of both the genetic and biophysical modeling
techniques used in this study.


DEGRADATION OF INDONESIAN CORAL REEFS: SCIENTIFIC AND MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES AND SOME SOLUTIONS… (Abstract ID: 29973)
Coral reefs of Indonesia, at the center of Coral Triangle biodiversity hotspot, have
suffered from long term pressures, including destructive fishing practices, overfishing,
coral mining, sedimentation, pollution, eutrophication, anchoring, and recently from coral
diseases and global warming. Global warming has caused serious coral mortality due to
mass bleaching around the globe in the last decades. Emerging diseases and more frequent outbreaks of coral predators such as Crown of Thorn star fish have also occurred
in many reefs. Due to long-term destruction and decreased population of herbivores and
increase of nutrient inputs, many reefs have experienced phase shift from coral to rubble,
sand, or algal dominated reefs. Combinations of these factors have contributed to coral
reef degradation in Indonesia, where only around 6% of coral reefs remain in very good
condition. Science based adaptive and effective management strategies have to find the
delicate balance among and between the people and the reefs to create more resilient
and productive coral reef ecosystems. Contemporary strategies include: introducing Marine Protected Area Networks, ecosystem approach for reef management, community
based and co-management, strong and effective regulations and proactive coral restoration. Can all of these solve the increasing and alarming pressures on the reefs, with
potential benefits to people and ecosystems? We illustrate some of these challenges, and
the potential solutions, with examples from around Indonesia, especially Sulawesi and
the Birds-Head Seascape.


KANEOHE BAY, OAHU, HAWAII: CENTURIES OF HUMAN IMPACT AND REEF
RECOVERY WITH PROJECTIONS TO 2050 (Abstract ID: 27908)
Kaneohe Bay has endured a long history of anthropogenic disturbance and recovery.
The bay is currently experiencing increasing episodes of coral bleaching due to global
warming. The long-term outcome is in doubt, so a review of past reef resilience can be
informative. The first contact by Polynesians occurred over 1500 years ago. Expanding population led to exploitation of marine resources, clearing of land for agriculture,
introduction of alien species, construction of massive shoreline fish pond enclosures and
extensive terraces in the valleys that were used for taro culture. The arrival by the first
Europeans in 1778 led to development of a plantation agricultural system accompanied
by increased human immigration, population growth and an end to traditional management practices. During 1930-1940 the reefs were devastated by extensive dredge and fill
operations. Human population increases led to extensive urbanization of the watershed.
By the 1960’s the bay was severely impacted by sewage discharge along with increased
sedimentation due to improper grading practices and stream diversion-channelization
that led to extensive loss of coral cover. Management action corrected many of these
problems and the reefs recovered. Increasing global temperature is now impacting these
reefs with the first “bleaching event” in 1996 and more severe events in 2014 and 2015.
The reefs of Kaneohe Bay developed and have persisted under severe natural and
anthropogenic perturbations. To date, these reefs have proved to be very resilient, but a
major question remains as to their limits in the face of future global climate change.


ENHANCING MULTI-STAKEHOLDER FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN POHNPEI,
FSM (Abstract ID: 30131)
Over the last two years, the Conservation Society of Pohnpei embarked on a comprehensive coral reef fisheries program to reverse the decline of food fish populations and
to establish sustainable management efforts. The program focuses on the integration
of strong partnerships, biophysical and socio-economic research, new management
interventions, good governance, and behavior change strategies to promote the longterm viability of fish harvesting, compliance, and retail practices among the stakeholders. Fish life history, standing stock, harvest, and market data from research provided
information for managers, resource users, and the general public to understand the
status and trends of highly targeted species – much of which indicated harvest levels
beyond biological capacity, spawning declines, and undermining commercial marketing.
To address these concerns, a multi-sectorial Fisheries Support Group helped to identify
threats and opportunities for sustainability, introduced new policy, assisted with strategies
to enhance compliance and fish retail. Additionally, a Marine Advisory Council provided
recommendations to traditional and community leaders on community engagement
and culturally appropriate management innovations. As a result of the increased public
awareness state, municipal, and traditional and religious leaders have taken concrete
steps to strengthen fisheries management. Specifically a number of new regulations and
co-management approaches have been adopted including size-based regulations for key
herbivores, along with enhanced multi-agency cooperation.


COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN MARINE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT: A CASE
STUDY OF THE PROPOSED TUN MUSTAPHA PARK, SABAH (Abstract ID: 29161)
In March 2003, the Government of Sabah approved the intention to gazette the proposed Tun Mustapha Park (TMP), an almost one million hectares marine area located
at the northern part of Sabah. Located within the Coral Triangle, TMP harbors one of
the richest marine flora and fauna complexes in the world and is also home to more than
80,000 coastal dwellers that depend on a healthy continuous supply of marine resources.
TMP will be the largest marine protected area in Malaysia once it is formally gazetted.
Because of its size and the commercial activities that occur in the region, it requires
a multidisciplinary and collaborative management system. Increasingly, community
support and participation in the establishment of a Marine Protected Area (MPA) is


THE REEF SULPHUR CYCLE: INFLUENCE ON CLIMATE AND ECOSYSTEM
SERIVICES (Abstract ID: 27784)
Research in the western Pacific over the last fifteen years has shown that hard corals
contain exceptionally high concentrations of a sulphur substance called dimethylsulphoniopropionate or DMSP which can produce a volatile sulphur substance called

163

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

DMS produces a sulphate aerosol which can potentially form cloud condensation nuclei
leading to low level cloud development. An increasing amount of evidence now suggests
that DMS emitted from coral reefs could keep sea surface temperatures (SSTs) cooler
in the western Pacific, including the Great Barrier Reef, through this reef produced low
level cloud climate feedback. However, recent research on the effect of coral bleaching
on this climate feedback indicates that enhanced solar radiation could reflect increased
DMS emissions from reefs increasing SSTs and causing this feedback to shut down, exacerbating the bleaching response. The production of these natural sulphur substances
from coral reefs; their effect on regional climate, bird, bacterial and fish behaviour, and
possible use as Polynesian navigational aids are reviewed, providing evidence of a very
valuable and important ecosystem service not previously described. Research on the effect of coral bleaching on this coral reef climate feedback indicates that increasing SSTs
cause this feedback to shut down, exacerbating the bleaching response.

MANGING DREDGING NEAR CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28779)
Maintenance and capital dredging represents a potential risk to tropical environments, especially in turbidity-sensitive environments such as coral reefs. There is a need to develop
water quality thresholds for dredging near coral reefs that can relate physical pressures
to biological responses and define exposure conditions above which effects could occur.
These thresholds can then be used for day-to-day management purposes. Water quality
characteristics during dredging have, however, not been well described and this information is needed to test realistic exposure scenarios, to better understand the seawaterquality implications of dredging, and ultimately to better predict and manage impacts of
future projects. Using water quality information from three recent major capital dredging
programs in North Western Australia, we describe sediment particle sizes in the water
column and seabed, suspended sediment concentrations at different temporal and spatial
scales during natural and dredging-related turbidity events, and changes in light quantity/
quality underneath plumes. These conditions differ considerably from those used in past
laboratory studies of the effects of sediments on corals. Other problems associated with
using information from past studies for developing thresholds include the existence of
multiple different and inter-connected cause-effect pathways (which can confuse/confound interpretations), the use of sediment proxies, and the reliance on information from
sediment traps to justify exposure regimes in sedimentation experiments.


EXAMINING RECOVERY RATES AMONG FISHES INSIDE A NO-TAKE MPA IN
As pressures mount to protect the economic and ecological benefits of its coral reefs
and associated fisheries, the Caribbean nation of Belize has increased the area of its
territorial sea under no-take protection as well as issued nation-wide harvest bans on
herbivorous fishes. In 2011, we set up a long term monitoring program at the onset
of the newly enforced no-take area within the South Water Caye Marine Reserve
(SWCMR), with 12 permanent transects inside the reserve boundary and 12 outside. An
aggressive protocol assesses hard corals and fishes for abundance, diversity, size distribution and condition while generating benthic composition photoquadrats. After five years
of bi-annual surveys, we found that coral cover and community composition differ
between habitats, but are similar inside and outside the no-take area. The abundances
of several fish species, however, are significantly higher inside the no-take area, a pattern
that presumably existed prior to no-take enforcement. After five years of monitoring, we
expect that fish species with nation-wide harvest bans (scarids and acanthurids) should
show no difference in abundance or biomass inside the SWCMR when compared to
outside the reserve. However, for long-lived species of commercial interest, trajectories
of abundance or biomass should differ inside the no-take area.


TRANSBOUNDARY CORAL REEF MONITORING FOR THE GRENADINES NETWORK OF MARINE PROTECTED AREAS (Abstract ID: 28356)
The establishment of GNMPA was led by local transboundary NGO the Sustainable
Grenadines Inc SusGren. In 2011, SusGren established the GNMPA in order to strengthen MPA management on the Grenada Bank. At a meeting in June 2014, the GNMPA
set short-term goals to train at least one staff member from each of the six participating
MPAs in coral reef monitoring, and to establish one long-term coral reef monitoring site
in each of the MPAs in the coming year (2014-2015). The Network selected the Atlantic
and Gulf Rapid Reef Assessment (AGRRA) protocol for reef ecosystem monitoring.
sponsor an AGRRA coral reef monitoring training workshop and the first Grenadineswide field work expedition by and for members of the Grenadines Network of Marine
Protected Areas. We will present findings about the condition of coral reefs across two
countries and six biologically-connected MPAs and highlight lessons learned for MPA
management in this and other locations in the Caribbean. All except for one site exhibited high coral cover and low fleshy macro algal cover relative to the Caribbean regional
towards coral dominated reefs if herbivores are brought back (eg. by protecting parrot
and other fish). Fish biomass, particularly of commercially important species such as
groupers and snappers, was found to be significantly lower in the Grenadines MPAs than
Caribbean regional averages, indicating strategic directions for education and outreach,
enforcement and ongoing monitoring.


LANDSCAPE PATTERNS OF SYMBIODINIUM COMMUNITY DYNAMICS IN
ORBICELLA FAVEOLATA DURING AND AFTER THE CONSECUTIVE MASS
BLEACHING EVENTS OF 2014 AND 2015 (Abstract ID: 29588)


Despite the high level of concern regarding coral bleaching, and the expectation that
bleaching events will increase in both severity and frequency, little is known about how
Symbiodinium dynamics correlate with landscape patterns of bleaching and recovery.
To this end, we tagged 150 colonies of Orbicella faveolata at six separate sites at Cheeca
Rocks, an inshore patch reef in the upper Florida Keys, and took tissue samples from
the same colonies during: 1) peak bleaching in 2014, 2) recovery in early 2015, and 3)
recovery from the 2015 mass bleaching in early 2016. Landscape patterns of bleaching
and recovery were investigated by taking > 2000 high resolution photographs from 1-2 m
above the seabed at each of the same six sites before, during and after the two bleaching
events. The photos were then stitched together to generate a composite mosaic image
approximately 10m by 10m. Tissue samples were analyzed using quantitative-PCR
to determine the relative abundance of Symbiodinium from clades A-D in each of the
corals. Plots (pie charts and bar graphs) depicting symbiont community structure in each
of the tagged colonies were layered over the landscape mosaics using ArcGIS to assess
linkages between symbiont types, mortality (partial and full), and recovery. These data
will provide insight into landscape patterns of bleaching and recovery, providing managers with information about bleaching patterns at the reef-scale and the role thatSymbiodinium play in these trends.

INTEGRATED INSTRUMENTATION FOR MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING (Abstract ID: 30127)
Persistent environmental monitoring can offer unparalleled information about marine
ecosystems but presents several challenges for instrumentation and data processing. Here we describe two novel systems to enhance capabilities and reduce costs for
environmental monitoring: 1) an Intelligent Adaptable Monitoring Package (iAMP) that
integrates a flexible suite of instrumentation into a single, streamlined body and 2) the infrastructure allowing an inspection class ROV and custom tool skid to deploy the iAMP
to a cabled docking station. The monitoring capabilities supported by the iAMP can
provide real-time visual and acoustic data of the surrounding marine environment for
multi-month deployments. Instrumentation supported by the iAMP prototype includes
a hybrid stereo-optical and acoustical camera system, a multi-beam sonar, a localizing
hydrophone array, fish tag receiver, and an acoustic Doppler wave and current profiler.
The adaptable design of this platform allows researchers to customize the instrument
164

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

variability, as well as benthos type at temporal and spatial scales not previously possible.
We document the accuracy and benefits of the systems and their resultant data, and also
assess the practical, logistical, and administrative challenges associated with developing
the capability for coral reef monitoring.

configuration to address evolving research goals. The iAMP software integrates the data
streams from all instruments to achieve situational awareness through sensor fusion.
This allows the iAMP to continuously monitor all sensors, but only archive events of
significance for post-processing. Integration also minimizes interference between active
acoustic instruments. While motivated by marine energy applications, the iAMP can
provide researchers with new information about a range of marine ecosystems.



NON-DESTRUCTIVE METHOD FOR COLLECTING INVERTEBRATE SPECIMENS
INHABITING CORAL COMMUNITIES USING IMPROVED LIGHT TRAP (Abstract
