promising tool for stock identification. The capacity to isolate stocks of commercially
important species is vital for the development of site-specific fisheries management and
conservation schemes. However, separating fish stocks using otolith shape have yet to be
explored for Philippine basins. This study aims to address this data gap by analyzing the effect of environmental conditions and fish growth on otolith shape by comparing the otolith
shapes of Siganus fuscescens specimens from the West and Northern Philippine Sea. In the
study, otolith shape was analyzed in two ways: (a) traditional morphometrics, where linear
distances traversing the otolith are associated with head measurements, and (b) geometric
morphometrics, where landmarks and semi-landmarks are used to outline and quantify
the boundary of the otolith. Variations in otolith shape was analyzed using thin-plate spline
transformations. At present, the initial batch of otolith specimens analyzed through geometric morphometrics showed noticeable differences in otolith shape between populations
from the West and Northern Philippine Sea. In contrast, only slight variation in otolith shape
between populations within the West Philippine Sea biogeographic region was observed.
basins. Furthermore, validation of these results via genetic analysis could establish otolith

Coral cover is rapidly declining globally, and coral species assemblages changing.
Although poorly quantified these changes are projected to lead to lower carbonate
production rates and thus reduced reef growth potential. Using data from sites in the Caribbean and Indian Ocean which have undergone different post-disturbance ecological
trajectories over the last 20-30 years, the differential impacts of disturbance on carbonate production regimes and on resultant reef growth potential can be explored. In the
Caribbean, a region which has undergone major ecological change, average carbonate
production rates are now less than 50% of pre-disturbance rates. In contrast, the budgets
of many reefs across the Chagos archipelago (central Indian Ocean), which is geographically remote and largely isolated from direct human disturbances, have recovered rapidly
from the 1998 coral bleaching event. The carbonate budgets on these reefs average
+3.7 G (G = kg CaCO3 m-2 yr-1) and are especially high on Acropora-dominated reefs
(average +8.4 G). These budget data provide a basis for estimating vertical reef growth
potential (mm yr-1). Although addition data are urgently needed to parameterise reef
growth rate estimates, current best-estimates point to marked inter-site variability. Across
the Caribbean the growth potential of most reefs is probably insufficient to track future
sea-level rise. In contrast, rates measured across the more geographically remote Indian
Ocean reefs suggest a more positive prognosis – albeit one that is dependent on the
maintenance of high Acropora coral cover.



THE STODDART SOCIETY: LONG-TERM RESEARCH ON THE ECOLOGY AND
CONSERVATION BIOLOGY OF LIGHTHOUSE REEF ATOLL, BELIZE (Abstract ID:
29825)
In the early 1960s, David Stoddart conducted the first surveys detailing the flora, fauna,
and geology of the three Caribbean atolls, including Lighthouse Reef (LHR), about 45
miles off the coast of Belize. Stoddard’s descriptions of the ecological distributions of
the marine, intertidal, and terrestrial organisms created a baseline for future scientists to
compare how oceanographic, atmospheric, and anthropogenic stresses have come to
shape the current community structures at LHR through time. Revisiting some of Stoddard’s transects more than 50 years later, we have begun to understand which species
have shifted their habitats, some expanding and some decreasing their distributions.
Three years ago, The Stoddart Society, as our Ecology and Conservation Biology of
Coral Reefs course at Wake Forest University has become informally known, began visiting LHR each March to conduct annual surveys documenting the current diversity and
abundance of the flora and fauna. Using methods established by Coral Watch and REEF,
we have increased the number of field sites to survey the coral health and fish populations across the atoll. By taking undergraduate students to the reef and teaching them
various techniques to study the flora and fauna at LHR, along with increasing our efforts
to include local NGOs and students from the University of Belize, we will continue to
promote the conservation and appropriate management necessary to sustain this coral
reef ecosystem and its services.

THE MYTH OF THE “HEALTHY” CORAL: THE NEED FOR PHENOTYPIC ANCHORING BEFORE AND DURING THE AGE OF ‘OMICS (Abstract ID: 28164)
A fundamental problem in the study of corals and other reef organisms is the difficulty
in determining their health, which may lead to incorrect conclusions about the results
of observations and experiments. Studying cells and tissues using microscopy helps us
understand how the structures formed by molecules function and allows us to detect
changes in structure that are related to functional impairment (disease). The use of
histopathological examinations and clinical diagnostic assays continues to be overlooked
in studies on these organisms. Corals that meet visual criteria as healthy may actually
contain microscopic lesions, parasites, or pathogenic microorganisms that affect their
metabolism and the interpretation of molecular analyses. The tissue loss diseases
in Caribbean acroporids first seen in the 1970s are now known to be influenced by
chronic infection of polyp mucocytes with a rickettsia-like organism. Coral bleaching
and hyperpigmentation can be subtle and have multiple causes, but the use of spectral
imaging paired with microscopy may provide non-invasive health screening techniques.
264

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Nature reserves are used globally as a management tool for protecting biodiversity both
on land and in the sea. In 1976, Australia established the Great Barrier Reef (GBR)
Marine Park, then by far the largest marine protected area in the world. In 2004, 33% of
the Park was designated as no-fishing reserves, creating a globally significant network
of highly protected reserves that stretches along the 2000 km length of the Reef. As
expected, the number and sizes of targeted fishes are consistently higher inside wellprotected no-fishing reserves. However, a recent meta-analysis of coral cover throughout
the tropics found that coral abundance was stable over a one-year period within marine
parks, whereas cover on unprotected reefs declined slightly by 0.3% in the Caribbean
and 0.4% in the Indo-Pacific. Therefore, it remains unclear if marine reserves also afford
protection to corals, the principal architects of tropical reefs. We quantified coral cover
that corals are substantially more abundant inside no-fishing reserves. Furthermore, the
species composition of coral assemblages also changes as cover increases, indicating
that fishing can generate important functional differences between reefs located within
reserves and those where fishing is present. The abundances of newly settled and
juvenile corals do not differ between reserves and fished reefs, suggesting that protection
by no-fishing reserves can be beneficial to adult corals.

Interactions of coral polyps with endolithic fungi deep in the skeleton can be limited and
benign, but in other cases environmental stimulation of fungal hyphae leads to basal
body wall necrosis and loss of gonads. Clinical and diagnostic methodologies support
evidence-based human and veterinary medicine; microscopic tissue examinations can
also contribute descriptive and mechanistic data to identify causes of organism decline
and focus management efforts to conserve coral reefs.


ASSISTED RECOVERY OF DEGRADED REEFS: CORAL RESTORATION WITHOUT THE NEED FOR TRANSPLANTATION (Abstract ID: 28312)
Current reef rehabilitation practices involving coral transplantation are labor and
cost intensive since each individual must be reared to a suitable size and transplanted
manually. These constraints have limited the scale of most restoration efforts to less
than a hectare, while reef degradation occurs on scales of 10’s to 1000’s of km2. We
introduce a new concept to seed larger areas of reef with sexually reared coral juveniles
bypassing the need for transplantation. Following the concept of a farmer bedding out
seedlings on a field, sexual coral propagules settled on engineered substrates (=SExual
COral REproduction Seeding Unit, SECORE SU) and reared in a nursery for a short time
period are introduced to the reef by wedging them in reef crevices without the use of
any adhesives. This concept was initially tested in Curacao with the brooding coral Favia
fragum using tetrapod-like shaped cement substrates. Three weeks after larval settlement
and after an intermediate ex-situ hatching period, SUs were introduced to reef areas
of varying structural complexity. Substrate stabilization, recruit survival and SU performance were monitored for 1 year. After 1 year, 70-81% of the tetrapods were recovered
across all reef complexity levels, of which 71-94% stabilized on the reef. In total 55-57%
of the tetrapods that were originally seeded to the reef still harbored ≥1 recruit (SU
performance). The results of this initial study indicate seeding SUs without the need
for transplantation offers great potential to increase the scale of reef restoration efforts.
Case studies carried out in Mexico, Guam and Singapore further highlight possibilities
and limitations of this new concept.

ANNOTATING AND ANALYZING LANDSCAPE-SCALE 3D MAPS OF BENTHIC
HABITATS IN CORAL-REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 30124)
Systematic underwater photography can be used to assemble a detailed digital record
of a benthic landscape’s visual appearance, topography and geometric structure.
Photogrammetric and computer vision techniques enable the reconstruction of massive
3D pointclouds---on the order of 500 million to 1 billion points for a 100 m^2 region--offering a dense digital representation of the landscape under study. We describe the
development of an efficient visual workflow for interactively inspecting and annotating
such massive datasets, with the aim of increasing their utility for performing ecological
analyses. In particular, we describe a scriptable software framework allowing taxonomic
annotation to be performed by virtually ‘painting’ the desired classifications onto the
visualized pointclouds, differentiating individual colonies. As an aid to classification, the
system can drape the most appropriate raw photograph locally onto the pointcloud (or
display it separately)---making the entirety of the collected data efficiently accessible. Further quantitative and qualitative analyses can be done both programmatically---by writing
and executing a script traversing the annotated dataset---and interactively, with the use of
custom script-defined measurement tools and ‘brushes.’ For example, the spatial distribution of colonies of a given morphology can be assessed, or the points constituting one or
more colonies can be exported (and optionally meshed and filtered) for further study. We
evaluate the results of these experiments and discuss our planned next steps.



FRESHWATER LENS DYNAMICS UNDER THE MAIN ISLAND OF AILUK ATOLL,
NORTHERN MARSHALL ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 28100 | Poster ID: 395)
Rising sea levels and drought threaten atoll settlements, as cisterns dry and wells
become brackish, and in our study location, Ailuk Atoll in the northern Marshall Islands,
such an event necessitated the emergency deployment of aid reverse osmosis (RO)
treatment units. Drought events are likely to continue; records on nearby Kwajalein
Atoll indicate an annual decline of 2.5 mm pa since 1954. Whilst the synergies between
precipitation, groundwater lenses and saltwater inundation have been modelled, measurements are lacking. Here we provide a summary of groundwater lens dynamics on
remote Ailuk Atoll in the northern Marshall Islands, combining ground water levels, sea
water influences, precipitation, and coral reef status in a groundwater dynamic model.
We used wells in different locations around the main island to monitor tidal fluctuations
and the quality of groundwater. We surveyed the ground elevation, coastline, wave
attenuation on different exposures, and reviewed historical records. The lens recharges
0.7 ML/mm rain - less seaward losses and evapotranspiration. Most household wells
were too brackish to serve potable needs. Tidal efficiency of wells and taro pits was
found range from 8% to 16%. The strongest correlation was found at the Dispensary set
among a grove of luxuriant breadfruit trees, which coincidentally also had the least lag
from the lagoon and among the least brackish. Modelling accounts for the lens as a leaky
reservoir so that it can be managed to support a sustainable island ecosystem - perhaps
with a sand dredge to maintain shore elevation.

CAPACITY BUILDING IN THE CORAL TRIANGLE REGION: G2G EFFORTS
(Abstract ID: 27907)
Since 2009, The Coral Triangle Initiative has proved a unique opportunity to provide
government to government support for capacity building around ocean and coastal resource management - from Marine Protected Area Management, Ecosystem Approach
to Fisheries Management, and Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fisheries. This
initiative has included the governments of the six CTI countries (Indonesia, Malaysia,
Philippines, Papau New Guinea, Solomon Islands, and Timor-Leste), several USAID missions, NOAA, and several international and local NGOs. The main goal of this initiative
was to build capacity and partnership towards better ocean governance. We will provide
an overview of our project with USAID-Philippines and the government of Philippines
with short presentations from the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources and the
Biodiversity Management Bureau.

OUR PROJECT IN HAWAI‘I’S INTERTIDAL (OPIHI): CITIZEN SCIENCE IN AN ACCESSIBLE MARINE ENVIRONMENT (Abstract ID: 30086)


Our Project In Hawai’i’s Intertidal (OPIHI) is a citizen science program for middle- and
high-school teachers and students to survey rocky intertidal areas in Hawai’i—a placebased, problem-based approach to learning through inquiry. The intertidal is vulnerable
to threats such as overharvesting, species invasions, and climate change effects. Howev-

NO-FISHING RESERVES PROTECT CORAL ASSEMBLAGES (Abstract ID: 27811 |
Poster ID: 638)
265

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

er, long-term monitoring is difficult to implement as seasonal wave activity, a small low
tide window, and limited tidal range mean the Hawaiian intertidal is often underwater or
inaccessible. Fortunately, the accessibility that makes the intertidal susceptible to human
impacts also makes it ideal for citizen-science research. The intertidal provides a safe
environment to engage students in marine science, an environment that might otherwise
be overlooked by educators due to student swimming restrictions. Teachers are prepared
to lead their students to collect rigorous monitoring data through the OPIHI professional
development program. OPIHI has both scientific and educational goals: (a) to improve
the content and scientific process knowledge of teachers and students, and (b) investigate if and how the Hawaiian intertidal community has changed since the last OPIHI
systematic surveys were conducted 10 years ago. This paper will share preliminary educational and scientific results from our statewide spring 2017 OPIHI teachers and their
students. We will also share best practices and lessons learned on conducting citizen
science research with students in species-rich environments—including data validation
and training techniques.

THE APPLICATION OF SOCIOECONOMIC MONITORING (SOCMON) METHODOLOGY IN ASSESSING BETWEEN TWO TIME PERIODS BINDUYAN MARINE
PROTECTED AREA IN PALAWAN, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29489)
Integration of Socioeconomic Monitoring (SocMon) at conservation sites can serve
to involve local communities in resource management, provide adaptive management
strategies to reflect the local needs, and facilitate understanding of the importance of
marine and coastal resources. In 2007, the SocMon methodology was used to assess
the status of Binduyan Marine Protected Area (MPA) in Puerto Princesa City, Palawan
indicators/variables, this study also involved other features that included an enrichment
of data gathering methods including the following: (1) additional data on coastal and
marine goods/activities using focused group discussion (FGD) method; (2) household
level climate change variables, including vulnerability, using household interview (HHI);
methodology was found useful in coming up with a comparative perspective between
two time periods. This project has become an avenue to propagate the use of SocMon
among academics, researchers, policy makers and coastal managers thereby enhancing
coral reef conservation and coastal resources management. SocMon has likewise
become a capacity building tool by convening and training new researchers, managers
and key stakeholders in generating relevant socioeconomic information.


LINKING PLOT TO REEF SCALES – HOW REEF SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT
BENEFITS FROM OPEN DATA, MODELS AND KNOWLEDGE (Abstract ID: 28106
| Poster ID: 544)
Significant changes in how we conduct coral reef science and management over the
past five years have altered how we collect and share data, as well as how we build,
evaluate and share methods and knowledge. This paper examines how changes in
data collection, analysis, modelling and publication are affecting coral reef science and
management. A critical assessment is provided of both the use of science in management and the increasing role of public involvement through community engagement
and citizen science. A fundamental conceptual model linking different scales of coral
reef structures and processes, from polyps to reef scales, is initially presented to define
the scope of data and knowledge required for addressing current coral reef science and
management objectives. Within this framework, open data publication and data re-use
represent a key factor for a more open, reproducible and transparent set of scientific
activities. Additionally, open collaboration provides the basis for developing regional
to global scale models and assessments, as well as creating code repositories for the
implementation, validation, and modification of methods in other study areas. Specific
examples are shown from different large-scale, long-term, regional and global data sets,
which demonstrate the advantages that open data and open collaboration provide for
achieving expanded science capabilities. This collaborative, multi- and inter-disciplinary
approach is essential for addressing the many regional and global challenges faced by
the coral reef science community.


EFFECTS OF CORAL DISEASE ON EXOSYMBIOTIC INVERTEBRATE ASSEMBLAGE (Abstract ID: 30160 | Poster ID: 614)
Coral diseases have persisted in our global oceans altering coral reef ecology. As
environmental conditions continue to alter ocean processes, coral colonies will be
left vulnerable to disease occurrences (Bruno 2007, Galloway 2009, Abey et al. 2010).
Common coral diseases such as coral bleaching, algal over growth, Trematodiasis, and
growth anomalies cause a variety of afflictions that increases coral mortality (Bruno
2007, Work 2008, Becker 2013). Scleractinian coral species are primary reef builders
that play major roles within coral reef systems. Predominant corals impacted by disease
are species from the montiporid, pocilloporid, and poritid coral families (Domart-Coulon
2006, Work 2008, Burns 2011). Because of different morphological features and physiological processes these coral species are host to many invertebrate exosymbionts that
will either seek refuge within or on the coral or feed on the coral itself (Bailey-Brock
1976, Ritson-Williams 2003, Apprill 2007, Shima 2010). These relationships can be either
specific or general depending on the coral host and the exosymbiont (Ritson-Williams
2003, LaJeunesse, 2004). The impact to these relationships from coral disease has been
understudied with little understanding of the effect of disease on exosymbiont assemblage. This study aims to examine the invertebrate exosymbiont assemblage on diseased
and healthy Porites colonies and create a field definition for growth anomalies (GA) on
Porites species that will contribute to understanding the impact coral disease has at the
community level to coral reef systems.

com


FROM JAPAN TO THE NORTHERN TIP OF THE RED SEA: A LONG, NON-STOP
JOURNEY FOR THE MESOPHOTIC SCLERACTINIAN SPECIESLEPTOSERIS
AMITORIENSIS ? (Abstract ID: 28564)

MESOPHOTIC CORAL REEF FISH COMMUNITIES IN THE CENTER OF MARINE
BIODIVERSITY (Abstract ID: 28858)

Leptoseris amitoriensis Veron, 1990 was described from Amitori Bay, Iriomote, in the
Ryukyu Archipelago, Japan. In Amitori Bay, it is a rather abundant, typically mesophotic
species, found around and below 50 m depth, co-occurring with other Leptoseris species
species. More recently the species was collected, also at mesophotic depths in several
stations at Eilat and Aqaba, the northernmost tip of the Red Sea, where it can be equally
abundant, forming large thickets of typically foliose colonies. Specific identity of the
specimens from both locations has been confirmed by examination of colony gross
morphology, both live in situ and from skeletal material, detailed stereomicroscopic examinations, Scanning Electron Microscopy imaging and genetic analyses. Comparisons
of skeletal morphologies indicate that specimens from both localities are conspecific.
This conclusion is also supported by the genetic data despite the complex situation of
molecular evolution in Leptoseris and corals in general. The presence of the species in
such widely separated areas in the Indo-Pacific, is indeed a remarkable case of complete
dissociation of geographic distribution likely to be unique in the scleractinian world. We
propose that such a distribution in the mesophotic environment may indicate either the
presence of relict populations or a more widespread distribution in the hitherto little
explored or unexplored deeper reef communities.

Philippines coral reefs are known for their extremely high biodiversity. However, most
of the information available for the area comes exclusively from shallow reefs, with
very few data published on Philippines’ mesophotic coral ecosystems (MCEs, 30-150m
depth). Here we describe the MCE fish community of three sites of the Verde Island
Passage, Philippines, the center of the center of global marine biodiversity. Sampling was
done using trimix (a breathing mix containing helium, nitrogen, and oxygen) closed-circuit rebreather diving. Data was obtained from 20 underwater visual censuses at depths
between 45 and 105 meters. A total of 22 families and 87 species were recorded, with an
average (SE) of 9.9 (0.9) species and 47 .7 (11.7) individuals per 40 m2. The richest families were Labridae (16 species), Serranidae (12), Pomacentridae (11), Pomacanthidae
(8) and Chaetodontidae (6). Both richness and density of fishes decreased significantly
with depth. Community composition also changed with depth: the most abundant
fishes of the upper MCE zone (45-70m) were Chromis analis, Pseudanthias luzonensis,
Pterocaesio pisang and Naso minor. Dominant fishes of the lower MCE zone (70-105m)
were Paracaesio sordidus, Genicanthus melanospilus, Pseudanthias engelhardi and
Genicanthus lamarck. Although some commercial species and sharks were recorded,
signs of overfishing and habitat degradation were also observed, and in some sites the
266

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

bottom was covered in abandoned broken fishing lines. Since most people don’t know
these diverse ecosystems exist and they sit outside marine protected areas, research and
an education campaign are necessary to better understand and protected them.

ORIGIN AND MAINTENANCE OF REEF FISH BIODIVERSITY IN SEAMOUNTS
AND OCEANIC ISLANDS OF THE SOUTH ATLANTIC (Abstract ID: 28714)
In the Southwestern Atlantic, twelve species are considered endemic to the seamounts
and islands of the Vitória-Trindade Chain (VTC). Endemic species exclusive to the
islands are suggested to have undergone allopatric speciation after sea level made the
seamounts connecting continental and insular populations uninhabitable by shallow
water species. These island endemic species are small and have limited dispersal ability.
Most of them are genetically and morphologically very similar to their mainland sister
species, suggesting recent divergence. Others endemics are wide spread along deeper
(mesophotic) ecosystems of VTC seamounts and islands, and also show evidence of
recent divergence. However, simple isolation cannot explain the origins of these species.
or relict species). We hypothesize that VTC seamounts became a refugia for coral reef
fauna during Pleistocene climatic variations, preserving these relict lineages, probably
due to environmental stability. Therefore, VTC islands and seamounts seem to be acting
as both cradle and museums for reef fish biodiversity.

surveyed and threatened tropical ecosystems on earth. These coral reefs vary widely in
terms of biophysical structure, seascape context, socio-economic value and exposure to
threats presenting a complex challenge for resilience-based management. How should
managers prioritize actions to maximize conservation outcomes? To meet multiple
conservation objectives, a novel map-based decision support tool was designed to synthesize large amounts of data to help managers identify and rank coral reefs according to
quality and threats. The framework integrates local expert knowledge from SCUBA divers, scientific field data and spatial models on biophysical features, ecosystem services,
stressors and resilience to characterize and rank priority coral reefs. The framework
will support risk assessments of coastal development, management of protected areas,
optimization of monitoring designs and broader marine spatial planning.



EQUIVALENCE OF MARINE DISPERSAL SCALES OVER EVOLUTIONARY AND
ECOLOGICAL TIME (Abstract ID: 29005)

SIMPLE, FAST AND REPEATABLE SURVEYS FOR UNDERWATER VISUAL 3D
BENTHIC MAPPING (Abstract ID: 29102)

The scales over which offspring disperse is critical for understanding ecology and evolution
in the ocean. At the moment, most estimates suggesting short-distance dispersal are based
on direct ecological observations of dispersing individuals, while evolutionary estimates
often suggest greater homogeneity among populations. Reconciling these two approaches
and their seemingly competing perspectives on dispersal has been a major challenge. Here
we show that evolutionary and ecological measurements of dispersal can agree, if carefully
calculated and compared. In populations of the orange clownfish (Amphiprion percula), we
found that evolutionary isolation by distance methods almost exactly matched an exhaustive set of direct larval dispersal observations in two separate time periods. Our results also
suggest that carefully constructed evolutionary estimates may be more broadly relevant for
understanding ecological dynamics than previously recognized.

State of the art visual 3D reconstruction techniques provide rich structural information
from underwater imagery. However, systematically covering areas much larger than
the footprint of a single image is challenging underwater. Properly instrumented robots
perform this task by precisely navigating a desired survey path. Unfortunately, access to
suitable robotic systems is limited and requires specialised operators, which curtails the
use and impact of these techniques. While humans can carry a similarly instrumented
imaging package, they cannot navigate so as to consistently maintain image overlap over
large extents. We present a simple method to quickly generate repeatable, high resolution
and large extent (~100m2) surveys with one swimmer and one support person (~15
min). The amount of image overlap is a design parameter, yielding surveys that can be
used in an automated processing pipeline to generate georeferenced 3D reconstructions,
orthographic 2D mosaics and structural complexity indices. Individual images or mosaics can also be labeled for benthic cover estimates. We describe the method and present
results from surveys conducted at reefs around Lizard Island in the Great Barrier Reef,
as part of an ongoing cyclone recovery monitoring project. As of 2016, 21 sites have
been visited 4 times, every ~6 months. We characterise the quality of data products and
repeatability of the technique. Its speed and reliability make it suitable for large-scale
benthic monitoring and research programs that aim to capture structural complexity and
benthic community dynamics.


BACKGROUND RATES OF MORTALITY AND INJURY FOR COMMON CORAL
TAXA ON AUSTRALIA’S GREAT BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 28685)
Studies on the population and community dynamics of scleractinian corals typically
and outbreaks of crown-of-thorn starfish), though corals are subject to high levels of
background mortality and injuries caused by routine and chronic processes. This study
quantified prevalence (proportion of colonies with injuries) and severity (areal extent of
injuries on individual colonies) of background mortality and injuries for four common
coral taxa (massive Porites, encrusting Montipora, Acropora hyacinthus and branching
Pocillopora) on the Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Sampling was conducted over three
consecutive years during which there were no major acute disturbances. A total of
2,276 adult colonies were surveyed across 27 sites, within nine reefs and three distinct
latitudinal sectors. The prevalence of injuries was very high (>83%) across all four taxa,
but highest for Porites (91%) and Montipora (85%). For these taxa (Montipora and Pocillopora) there was also significant temporal and spatial variation in prevalence of partial
mortality. The severity of injuries ranged from 3% to more than 80% and varied among
coral taxa, but was fairly constant spatially and temporally. Establishing background
levels of injury and regeneration are important for understanding energy investment and
life-history consequences for reef-building corals as well as for predicting susceptibility to,
and capacity to recover from, acute disturbances.

co

CHARACTERIZING AN IMPROBABLE REEF AT VARADERO, CARTAGENA BAY,
COLOMBIA (Abstract ID: 29888 | Poster ID: 300)
In 2013, Colombian scientists discovered Varadero reef in the least expected place. The
reef is located off one of the entrances of Cartagena Bay (Colombia), a highly polluted
Bay that receives industrial and sewage waste, as well as high sediment and freshwater
loads from an outlet of Magdalena River. The latter is the main cause of the loss of
all reefs within the Bay and the high reef degradation at nearby Rosario Archipelago.
267

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Changes in the coral reef complex can affect predator-prey relationships, resource
availability and niche utilisation in the associated fish community, which may be reflected
in decreased stability of the functional traits present in a community. This is because
particular traits may be favoured by a changing environment while other traits can be
selected against where degradation can relax the association between fishes and benthic
habitat. We characterised six important ecological traits for fish species occurring at
seven sites across a coral reef archipelago in Indonesia, where reefs have been exposed
to eutrophication for decades. Two functional diversity indices were related to important
environmental factors (live coral cover, rugosity and distance from shore) examining
both the change in mean, as well as temporal and spatial variability, to assess whether
fish-habitat association became relaxed along with habitat degradation. Increases in live
coral cover and rugosity were associated with decreases in the variability of functional
diversity and with community-level changes in the abundance of several traits. A decrease in coral increased variability of RaoQ while rugosity and distance both inversely
affected variability of FRic; however averages of these indices did not reveal patterns.
These results suggest that increased degradation of coral reefs is associated with
increased variability in fish community functional composition resulting from impacts on
specific traits, thereby affecting the functional response of these communities to increasing perturbations.

Varadero reef was overlooked as the high turbidity of its overlying waters led to the
assumption that no corals would develop. After a quick initial characterization, Varadero
reef was shown as one of the healthiest reefs in Colombian Caribbean waters (up to 80%
live coral cover). To understand how and why a highly developed reef is thriving under
such unusual conditions, in 2015 data were collected to have a more complete description of the reef in terms of extension, community composition and diversity, coral health
and water quality. Varadero reef extends over 1740 m and continues towards Baru
island. Although reef structure starts at 30 m, high coral cover is between 2 and 12 m
depth. A total of 38 coral species occur there, with Orbicella spp. as the dominant genus.
Average live coral cover was 47% and disease prevalence was less than 0,4%. Varadero
reef seems to be healthier than nearby reefs, despite the poor quality of its overlying
waters. Future research includes studies on the coral holobiont and its responses to
environmental drivers and physiological observations to assess algal performance and
coral calcification rates.

CORAL REEF ASSOCIATED CRYTPOFAUNA DIVERSITY PATTERNS ALONG A
NATURAL PH GRADIENT (Abstract ID: 28856)


Naturally occurring high CO2 zones on coral reefs provide us with the opportunity
to study whole community patterns of biodiversity influenced by both the direct and
the Milne Bay Province, Papua New Guinea, where CO2 vents provide naturally low
pH conditions. We deployed standardized 3-dimensional samplers (ARMS) on the reef
at 3 m depth at three pH regimes (regular 8.0, medium 7.8-7.9 and low 7.6-7.8). After 2
years, we retrieved the structures and extracted all living organisms. The larger motile invertebrates (>2mm) were individually barcoded using the standard cytochrome oxidase
subunit I fragment (COI). The smaller motile organisms (500 - 2000 µm) and the sessile
organisms were bulk collected and metabarcoded using high-throughput sequencing of a
shorter COI fragment. Diversity patterns were most different for the >2mm invertebrate
Rarefaction curves showed that ACE diversity estimator reached a plateau at low pH,
for the bulk fractions with reductions in diversity of 24% and 21% for the motile and sessile fractions. The ARMS community composition at higher taxonomic levels was similar
in all pH conditions. The resulting data allow us to determine how future changes in pH
could affect coral reef diversity while providing critical data for a region and fauna that
are both highly diverse and poorly known.

RESPONSES OF THE CORAL HOLOBIONT TO LABILE DISSOLVED ORGANIC
CARBON SHED LIGHT ON THE ROLE OF DINITROGEN FIXATION IN BLEACHING (Abstract ID: 27922)
The temperature-induced disruption of the coral-algae symbiosis (coral bleaching) has
caused a global coral reef decline. Still, the understanding of mechanisms underlying
bleaching remains incomplete. Both elevated temperatures and labile dissolved organic
carbon (DOC) not only induce bleaching, but also stimulate coral-associated dinitrogen
(N2) fixation actvity. Thus, increased N2 fixation may mediate symbiotic breakdown by
shifting Symbiodinium from nitrogen (N) limitation to phosphorus (P) starvation. To test
this assertion, we selectively stimulated coral N2 fixation activity ex situ via daily doses
of labile DOC over 28 days and measured individual responses of the main holobiont
compartments of Pocillopora verrucosa. Corals exposed to high DOC conditions rapidly
exhibited significantly increased N2 fixation rates and abundance of N2 fixing bacteria,
in algae and coral tissue, this confirms the rapid uptake of fixed N by algal symbionts.
Concomitantly, we observed symbiotic breakdown resulting in bleaching, reflected in
loss of symbiotic algae, and drop in photosynthetic yield and rates. Our data suggest the
breakdown was caused by shifting algae to P starvation due to elevated fixed N availability. This mechanism appears independent of thermal stress. In conclusion, increased N2
fixation may mediate coral bleaching by alleviating Symbiodinium from N limitation. Our
findings imply that improved water quality may mitigate the effects of anthropogenicallydriven environmental change.


CONNECTING SCIENCE AND PEOPLE TO IMPROVE LOCAL FISHERIES MANAGEMENT WITH GLENN (Abstract ID: 29627)
Understanding the complex life cycle of coral reef fish is of critical importance if we
are to succeed in improving fisheries management. But science alone cannot solve
management problems. In the Pacific, local communities have been managing their
marine resources for millennia, but with today’s changing world and dwindling resources,
these communities are facing overfishing. To ensure the persistence of these island communities and cultures through time, science and local community management must
come together to find solutions. Glenn’s research was motivated by this concept, and
his global proposal for the CNRS build a research program designed to improve marine
conservation planning and biodiversity protection by synthesizing and incorporating
connectivity data. Glenn himself was in fact a connector, as he used to say, with a goal of
connecting the best colleagues to (1) increase understanding of ecological connectivity
among coral reefs; (2) evaluate MPA theory and guidelines based on analyses of new
connectivity data; and (3) revise or develop new tools to implement recommendations
stemming from current projects. Glenn was a scientist and someone who cared deeply
for people and nature and was driven to make important research outcomes relevant
and accessible for decision to local communities, governments and NGO partners. This
was his passion… and now his legacy.


EVIDENCE OF ADAPTATION IN A CORAL-ALGAL SYMBIOSIS AT MESOPHOTIC
DEPTHS IN THE NORTHWEST GULF OF MEXICO (Abstract ID: 28846 | Poster ID: 331)
Many coral species common in shallow habitats also live in the mesophotic zone (30150 m). Similar to shallow corals, many mesophotic corals maintain important symbioses with photosynthetic microalgae in the genusSymbiodinium. Despite the importance
of the coral-algal symbiosis in corals’ ability to thrive in multiple dynamic environments,
few studies have focused on symbionts associated with mesophotic corals. This study
compares the algal symbiont assemblages in Montastraea cavernosa found at shallow
(20-25 m) and mesophotic (45-50 m) sites at the East and West banks of Flower Garden
Banks (FGB) National Marine Sanctuary. Symbiont densities per unit area of coral tissue
area of coral tissue are significantly higher in mesophotic corals. These results suggest
that increased symbiont densities may be a method of adaptation for zooxanthellate corals in mesophotic reef environments. Symbiont densities and chlorophyll concentrations
did not differ between the East and West banks. Next generation sequencing of the ITS2
gene provides a comprehensive assessment of symbiont community structure, including


NON-RANDOM VARIABILITY IN FUNCTIONAL COMPOSITION OF CORAL
REEF FISH COMMUNITIES ALONG AN ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENT (Abstract
ID: 28047 | Poster ID: 504)
268

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

15 m wide transects in coastal Maui, Lanai, Hawaii, and Oahu Islands at depths ranging
from 2 to 10 m. A team of two towed divers collected visual estimates of percentage
of live coral that was pale and bleached. Photographic data were collected using a
downward-facing DSLR camera with strobes that captured a benthic image every 15
seconds. Conductivity, temperature, depth, chlorophyll-a, turbidity, and dissolved oxygen
were collected continuously along each survey track using a suite of sensors mounted
to the towboards. Preliminary analyses of field observations show significant bleaching
affects at all islands. The most severe impacts were seen at Hawaii Island, where observers estimated 49% of live coral was affected by the event. We will present a correlative
analysis of observer data with 1) total local degree heating weeks, 2) terrigenous input
(sedimentation, development history, land use), and 3) the observed oceanographic
parameters. Towed-diver surveys offer reef managers an efficient option for broad-scale
characterization of extent, intensity, differential taxonomic response, and oceanographic
correlates of coral bleaching.

ditional comparisons between shallow and mesophotic reefs are designed to help inform
management strategies for FGB and similar coral reef communities.

SHIPWRECKS, PHASE SHIFTS AND REEF RESTORATION: SCIENCE AND
MANAGEMENT OF THE PALMYRA UNIT OF THE PACIFIC REMOTE ISLANDS
MARINE NATIONAL MONUMENT (Abstract ID: 29616 | Poster ID: 626)
Management of remote coral reefs is a challenge, and the removal of a shipwreck
1600 km away from civilization is a daunting task. Palmyra Atoll is a unit of the Pacific
Remote Islands Marine National Monument. The atoll is managed by the US Fish and
Wildlife Service (FWS) and The Nature Conservancy, who administer a research station
for the Palmyra Atoll Research Consortium (PARC). The grounding of a fishing vessel
at Palmyra subsequently caused a phase shift from a healthy coral reef, to a monotypic
stand of an invasive species. Systematic surveys and monitoring of Palmyra’s reefs
by PARC researchers’ discovered corallimorph smothering the reef around the wreck, revealing the phase shift to be associated with the degrading wreck. Continued monitoring
documented the spread of the corallimorph over 3 km of pristine coral reef. In the fall
of 2013 the FWS, with the help of marine salvors, removed the wreck. Data collected by
researchers were used to document both the spread of the corallimorph, indicating an
immediate problem, and helped guide the removal process, leading to best management
practices for removal and restoration without further damaging the reef ecosystem.
Novel approaches were used to accomplish and monitor this difficult task. The wreck
removal was the first step in a larger coral reef restoration project. Managers and partner
scientists continue to monitor the corallimorph, efficacy of wreck removal, and explore
options for larger-scale corallimorph treatment and habitat restoration. Information
learned aids in the management of the Monument, and informs coral reef management
throughout the Pacific.


MOVINGTOWARDSANECOSYSTEMAPPROACHTO FISHERIES MANAGEMENTIN
THE CORALTRIANGLEREGION (Abstract ID: 27924)
Applying an EAFM is considered the preferred option and best practice under the CTICFF for the long- term sustainability of fisheries and the ecosystem services provided
health and well-being). This paper presents progress of the six CTI countries toward
EAFM principles is presented. Challenges to effective implementation of an EAFM in
the Coral Triangle region are discussed and recommendations to overcome some of the
key challenges are provided.

MAPPING EFFECTS OF 3D HABITAT STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY AND ORIGIN
ON FISH ASSEMBLAGES (Abstract ID: 28098 | Poster ID: 237)


Habitat structural complexity is a key driver of local biotic assemblages. Modifications to
marine habitat (both intentional and coincidental) present an opportunity to explore how
elements of 3D complexity influence fish and sessile assemblages. To capture complexity at fish-relevant spatial extents and resolutions, a novel mapping tool using affordable
and widely accessible off-the-shelf tools was developed and trialled. Target spatial
extents of 500 – 1000 m2 were achieved with cm resolution and only 4% coefficient
of variation. Paired with Underwater Visual Census data these maps allow exploration
of the relationship between local assemblages and complexity at 100, 250 and 600 m2
spatial extents. Abundance and diversity increased with 3D complexity of habitat. Additionally, fish assemblages were significantly different at anthropogenic habitats (break
walls) than at natural reefs. Interestingly, this trend was driven largely by pelagic species
These findings suggest that modifying structural complexity of anthropogenic structures
could significantly influence local fish biodiversity.

THE CORAL MICROBIOME ACROSS SPECIES, SPACE AND TIME (Abstract ID:
29365)
Coral-associated bacteria are increasingly recognized as indispensable contributors to
coral physiology and health, yet we know very little about their basic ecology. Here, we
employ high-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing to examine host, environmental
and temporal influences on the microbiome of 35 coral taxa from three locations across
Australia (Lizard Island, Northern Great Barrier Reef; Lord Howe Island, the world’s
most southern coral reef; and Ningaloo Reef, Indian Ocean). We also explore patterns in
microbiome structure between seasons, through repeated sampling at Lizard Island, and
across anatomic locations, by partitioning coral sample into mucus, tissue and skeleton
compartments. This study characterizes the bacterial composition of 687 unique coral
‘core’ microbiome within and among coral taxa, 2) microbiome partitioning across
micro-scale habitats within the coral host and 3) the influence of local environmental
conditions on bacterial community structure. Establishing patterns in coral-associated
microbiomes and determining the environmental factors underlying them is vital to
understanding coral symbiont community assembly, and ultimately, the role of coralassociated microbes in host physiology and health.


SPECIES DIVERSITY TRENDS OF STONY CORALS IN THE FLORIDA KEYS
NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARY, 1996-2010 (Abstract ID: 28709)
Coral biodiversity is critical to maintaining reef survival and function. We assessed the
changes in coral community diversity to determine spatial and taxonomic patterns of
change. Annual species counts were conducted at 34 fixed sites throughout the FKNMS
over a 15-year period from 1996 - 2010. Keys-wide, average species richness declined at
rate of -0.21 species per year. Species richness at deep sites along the offshore reef tract
decreased most severely between 1996 and 2006, at a rate of -0.51 species per year, but
leveled off after 2007. Shallow sites on the offshore reef tract had variable richness in
the early years of the survey, but decreased at an average rate of -0.15 species per year
since 1999. Mid-channel patch reef stations lost an average of -0.16 species per year
throughout the survey period. Species lost from the highest number of sites included
Mycetophyllia ferox (-35%), Acropora cervicornis (-32%), Mycetophyllia lamarckiana (-29%),
and Favia fragum (-21%). Our data show a uniform, almost monotonic, decline in species. Multiple regression models reveal that spatial factors (such as shallow-offshore,
deep-offshore, and patch reefs) and nutrient concentrations (both N and P) were the

gov

TOWED-DIVER SURVEYS OF THE 2015 CORAL BLEACHING EVENT IN HAWAII:
AN EFFICIENT METHOD FOR BROADSCALE ASSESSMENT OF BLEACHING
IMPACTS (Abstract ID: 28991)
The 2015 global coral bleaching event brought widespread impacts to Hawaii. Our
team deployed on a 2-week research cruise in November 2015 to observe the spatial
extent and severity of bleaching impacts in the main Hawaiian Islands using towed-diver
survey methods. Survey tracks for the entire mission covered approximately 80 km of

269

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

GMYC model, using single locus data, were proposed as means of increasing the rate
of biodiversity description. We applied these methods to explore the cryptic diversity
of Aglaopheniidae, a hydrozoan family widely distributed in the Indo-Pacific region.
For two species of this family, Lytocarpia brevirostris and Macrorhynchia phoenicea,
we compared the outputs to several clustering analyses based on microsatellite data
and to nuclear genes phylogenies. Our analyses revealed widespread cryptic diversity
in this family, various species presenting several independent evolutionary lineages,
and supported hypothesized cases of synonymy. Comparisons of results between
species delimitation methods and microsatellite data were congruent for Lytocarpia
brevirostris, revealing the existence two cryptic species. For Macrorhynchia phoenicea,
results were inconsistent but all analyses confirmed the divergence of two evolutionary
lineages in the South-West Indian Ocean that could not be distinguished using standard
morphological characters. Our study suggests that the diversity of Aglaopheniidae
might be extremely high, likely due to low dispersal capacities. Sequence-based species
delimitation methods seem highly valuable to reveal cryptic diversity in hydrozoans;
their application in an integrative framework will be very useful in describing the phyletic
diversity these organisms.

most important parameters influencing species decline rates. These data argue against
the influence of climatic extremes, such as hurricanes and bleaching events, and for the
importance of chronic stressors, such as water quality, as major controllers of species
number. Current (2016) El Nino conditions will test this hypothesis.
LONG-TERM DYNAMICS OF A HIGH-LATITUDE CORAL COMMUNITY AT
SODWANA BAY, SOUTH AFRICA (Abstract ID: 29347)
Dynamics in percentage cover, mortality and recruitment success of a high-latitude coral
assemblage in South Africa were studied over 20 years with the rationale of detecting
the effects of climate change. Coral communities at this locality are the southernmost
on the African continent, non-accretive, attain high biodiversity and are dominated by
soft corals. Long-term monitoring within fixed transects on representative reef was
initiated in 1993, and has entailed annual photo-quadrat surveys and hourly temperature
subsequently been decreasing, and the overall trend based on monthly means since
Minor bleaching was encountered during the 1998 El Niño Southern Oscillation event. A
significant decreasing trend in soft coral cover has been evident throughout the monitoring period, attributable to decreases in Sinularia and Lobophytum spp. cover (p < 0.005).
Contrastingly, hard coral cover gradually and significantly increased (p = 0.0048) up to
2005, this being largely attributable to increases in cover by Acropora spp. (p = 0.0089).
Recruitment success and mortality for both soft and hard corals has displayed high
inter-annual variability with increasing but non-significant trends in the last five years.
The reduction in soft coral cover has been more consistent and greater than that of hard
corals but it is difficult at this stage to attribute this to changes in acidification-linked
accretion or temperature.


INVOLVING TRADITIONAL FISHERMEN IN MPA MANAGEMENT : TOWARDS A
WIN-WIN SITUATION IN REUNION (Abstract ID: 29478 | Poster ID: 605)
The success of conservation initiatives is often linked to trade-offs between the stakeholders’ personal interests, the protection of the natural ecosystem and the management
initiatives. Coral reefs in Reunion are limited to the west coast and strongly exploited
by a variety of users, that includes the traditional fishermen. These fishermen fish using
traditional fishing gears but do not depend anymore on their catch for their livelihood
thanks to the government aids. In January 2015, they started arguing with the management team about possible changes of the MPA regulation policy, especially regarding
the move of their fishing zones and the increase in fishing duration. The MPA team took
this opportunity to propose a “win-win” contract, which aimed in reinforcing the MPA
acceptation within the fishermen. It agreed for some changes in the location of the fishing zones if the fishermen accepted to strictly follow the regulations and participate in
the daily collection of fishery data using a logbook. Fisheries mediators were planned to
be recruited to verify the fishermen engagement and maintain a strong link between the
two stakeholders. Good progress was made and the new fishing zones were ready to be
opened after one year. Nevertheless, the fishermen ended the discussion process at the
last minute. This presentation will discuss on the success and limits of this challenging
situation, which is a common problem in MPA management and can be used for further
comparison.


INCORPORATING CATASTROPHES AND PROBABILITY OF SUCCESS IN SPATIAL PLANNING OF MARINE CONSERVATION ACTIONS (Abstract ID: 28434)


Coral reef spatial planning focuses on representing a range of conservation features, usually habitats and species, and creating well-connected management area networks, while
minimising impacts on human socio-economic systems. One area of conservation planning that is often ignored, or considered in a confused fashion, is risk and uncertainty.
There is always uncertainty about data, there are different risks to different sites, plus
there are risks conservation actions will fail (via catastrophes or poor implementation) .
In this talk we will discuss a range of situations where threats, uncertainty and catastrophes affect the coral reef system of interest. First we note there are three kinds of threat
– those that are stopped by marine reserves, those that are partially mitigated and those
high threats lead to high benefits of actions, while in the third situation, high threats
usually mean that we will avoid those sites for conservation action. Second, uncertainty
in the ecological effect of actions and their socio-economic feasibility is clearly pivotal
to planning, and can be quantified with probabilities (all of which are uncertain). In the
spatial planning software, Marxan, we use probability theory to determine priorities for
coral reef conservation that integrate threat and feasibility with issues of cost, connectivity and representation.

MACROPLANKTON, MICRONESIA, AND MESOSCALE MOVEMENT MODELS:
QUANTIFYING LARVAL TRANSPORT PATHWAYS AROUND THE MARIANA
ARCHIPELAGO (Abstract ID: 29891)
Many coral reef organisms have a larval development phase in pelagic environments.
These larvae may return to their natal islands or be dispersed downstream in ocean
currents. Understanding the strength and geographic patterns of larval connectivity is
an important part of managing marine ecosystems through ecosystem based fisheries
management, marine protected area network design, recovery strategies for endangered
species, and promoting resilient reefs. Sufficient sources of larvae must be maintained to
sustain future generations. In recent years, there have been calls for a better understanding of larval connectivity in the Mariana Archipelago, an ~800 km span of islands and
submerged banks that includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
and Guam. To evaluate ocean currents as a mechanism of larval transport in this region
and to compare larval connectivity patterns for several taxa, computer simulations were
used to track cohorts of virtual larvae transported according to an ocean circulation
model. Virtual larvae were spawned from 2004-2012 at each of 116 locations. Larval
production was scaled to each island’s area of potential reef ecosystem. Simulations
incorporated several larval life history parameters, including pelagic larval duration, precompetency, mortality, and sensory capability. Cumulative connectivity over the 9 year
period was summarized for the entire region. The role of each island in the archipelago
as a larval source or destination was evaluated. For Saipan and Guam seasonal and
inter-annual variation in larval supply was examined.



EXTENSIVE LINEAGE DIVERSITY AND CRYPTIC SPECIES IN AGLAOPHENIIDAE
(HYDROZOA) SPECIES REVEALED BY MOLECULAR SPECIES DELIMITATION
METHODS AND POPULATION GENETICS (Abstract ID: 29309)

EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE AND PH ON GROWTH OF OSTREOPSIS

A comprehensive inventory of global biodiversity would be greatly improved by automating methods of species delimitation. The ABGD method, the PTP algorithm and the
270

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

headquarter coordinates the network and provides supports for both science capacity
and organizational building. To minimize the costs, innovative coordination using various
modes include social media. With the bleak prediction of future bleaching events, it is
hoped that the RCNI can be strengthened and expanded by using a more high tech and
simpler information sharing system, as well as a data base.

The impact of global warming on high temperature and low pH of seawater lead to
coral bleaching and benthic microalga bloom in coral reef area. Ostreopsis cf. siamensis is
a benthic dinoflagellate that reported as one causative microalga for ciguatera fish toxin.
In order to clarify the effects of temperature and pH on growth of Ostreopsis cf. siamensis,
the experiments have been conducted on this species isolated from Chang Island. Three
set of temperature at 27 (control), 30 and 33 C have been designed for the experiments.
For each temperature level there were four experiments of pH 6, 7, 8 and 9. Sampling
cells were enumerated every 2 days for 25 days. Cells cultured at 27 and 30 had the
normal growth rate whereas the growth rate of cell at 33 C gradually decreased from
the beginning and most cells died on day 15. At 27 and 30 C Ostreopsis cf. siamensis grew
normally in all pH levels but very low growth rate with high mucus excretion and pale
cell color have been found at pH 9. The highest specific growth rate of 0.56 was found



EMPTY NICHES AFTER EXTINCTIONS INCREASE POPULATION SIZES OF
MODERN CORALS (Abstract ID: 28334)

A DIFFERENT KIND OF OCEAN ACIDIFICATION AND ANOTHER REFUGIUM
FOR PH-TOLERANT ORGANISMS (Abstract ID: 30053)

Estimates of population size as a function of time can show how history has shaped
the evolution of current species, provide accurate models to interpret contemporary
genetic data, and generate a framework to implement successful conservation strategies.
This information is relevant when paleontological evidence is rich and provides direct
ecological evidence on what triggers variations in population size. We studied how
variation in abiotic and biotic environments since the late Pliocene shaped historical
changes in the population sizes of corals of the genus Orbicella, the major current reef
builders in the Caribbean. Our results suggest populations of all three Orbicella species
share patterns of population decline around 1-2 million years ago (Ma) coincident with
the extinction of 80 % of Caribbean coral species. The change in population size is
consistent for the three species despite their ecological difference. More recently, the two
least two fold. The growth of these two species coincides with the recent disappearance
of their sister competitor species Orbicella nancyi (organ-pipe). Our study suggests that
populations of modern Orbicella species are capable of rebounding from reductions in
population size under suitable conditions.

Many modern reefs grow on submerged portions of older limestones deposited by
previous reef systems. Sub-surface cavities, formed by karstic erosion during lower Pleistocene sea levels, now channel meteoric groundwater offshore, where it often emerges
as submarine springs in or near living reefs. As rainwater percolates through karstic sediments and limestones, dissolved carbon dioxide reacts with calcium carbonate; modifies
pH, alkalinity, and carbonate saturation states; and leads to other changes in water
chemistry. Off the coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, this groundwater mixes with seawater
before discharging at permanent springs or “ojos” with water that is close to oceanic
salinity but has low pH, elevated alkalinity, and variable nutrient content. Many ojos are
surrounded by often stable and persistent pH and alkalinity gradients that are occupied
by long-lived calcifying organisms. We describe assemblages of coralline algae and
scleractinian corals living in a system of low pH springs near Puerto Morales, Mexico
and summarize physical and chemical correlates. We hypothesize that individuals able to
be too small for recruitment of planktonic larvae to their parental sites, multiple springs
within a defined region ensure that some tolerant individuals are always present within
the region, and they are likely to increase in abundance and distribution with increasing
acidification of the oceans.



OCEAN WARMING AND ACIDIFICATION SYNERGISTICALLY INCREASE CORAL
MORTALITY (Abstract ID: 29374)

KEEP THE EYES ON THE REEF DURING HOT SEASON IN ARCHIPELAGIC NATION OF INDONESIA: A CASE OF CORAL BLEACHING NETWORK INDONESIA
(Abstract ID: 29306)

CO2-driven ocean warming (OW) and acidification (OA) has prompted urgent research
to assess their potential effects on the marine environment, with strong emphasis on calcifying organisms. To correctly predict how these stressors will affect marine organisms,
their synergistic effects must be assessed. Here we investigate the interactive effects of
OW and OA on the mortality and growth of three Mediterranean coral species: the solitary zooxanthellate Balanophyllia europaea, the solitary non-zooxanthellate Leptopsammia pruvoti and the colonial non-zooxanthellate Astroides calycularis. Corals were transplanted, in different seasons, in proximity to a volcanic CO2 vent where water is naturally
acidified to levels matching future IPCC scenarios. We show a strong synergistic adverse
effect on mortality rates of the three species. Net calcification rates of the zooxanthellate
species were not affected by reduced pH, while those of the two non-zooxanthellate species were negatively affected, indicating that different levels of resilience/resistance to
OW and OA among species in symbiosis with photosynthetic algae or asymbiotic ones
may be related to different modes of nutrition and/or biomineralization processes. Natural CO2-leaking marine sites can provide essential information on the combined effects
of OA and OW on Mediterranean scleractinian corals, which may help understand to
which extent different corals will be threatened by increasing atmospheric CO2 pollution.

To monitor bleaching event and how the reef is impacted, timing is really important.
However, tracking bleaching development in vast-scattered reef nations such as Indonesia is really challenging. Reef Check Network Indonesia (RCNI) and partners worked
together in creating a coral bleaching network to cope with 2009-2010 bleaching event.
An alert, based on NOAA coral bleaching satellite data, was distributed regularly to the
network during the hot season. This is followed by personal communication to certain
members in bleaching alert areas. The network provided an in situ coral bleaching
early warning. RCNI then distributed this information to its scientist members so they
can determined whether or not a more thorough coral bleaching data was needed. By
2010, the network gathered the most comprehensive coral bleaching data in Indonesia
despite that there was no resources dedicated to this effort. The success lays behind
RCNI structured. Started in 1997, the network rapidly grows comprising ranges of reef
stakeholders from individual to institution, from fisherman to scientists. By 2015 the
network has covered all main islands in Indonesia, involving up to 2,500 volunteers. A

271

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


only for the sake of conservation, but also the MPA should be developed in the frame of
prosperity of the people, sovereignty of the country, and sustainability of the resource
use. In this presentation, challenges of managing regional activities would be discussed.

ACCLIMATION OF ADULT AND JUVENILE MESOPHOTIC SERIATOPORA HYSTRIX TO SHALLOW REEF HABITATS (Abstract ID: 29381)
of the mesophotic coral’s contribution to shallow reef recovery depends on their ability
to acclimate to shallow reef conditions. Here we examined the physiological capacity of
adults and juveniles of the coral Seriatopora hystrix from an upper MCE (ca. 40 m depth)
to acclimate to shallow reef conditions for 6 months. Both adult fragments and coral juveniles were transplanted to 3, 20, and 40 m depth reef habitats and monitored monthly.
Most of the adult fragments at 3 m depth were lost due to a typhoon and were discarded
from the analysis. High survival of adults was observed at 20 m and 40 m depth. All
coral juveniles died when transplanted at 3 m depth, while at 20 m and 40 m depth they
died by an average of 20.5% and 21% every month, respectively. This study revealed
the capacity of mesophotic Seriatopora hystrix to acclimate to shallower environmental
for shallow reef recovery, with mesophotic corals avoiding mortality due to extreme
environmental conditions in the shallow reefs but adapting to shallower conditions. The
photophysiological and symbiont characteristics of the transplants and their role in the
adaptation process will be discussed.

THE EVOLUTIONARY CHALLENGE OF CLIMATE CHANGE: ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN THE MEDITERRANEAN RED CORAL (Abstract ID: 27813 | Poster ID: 17)
The on-going climate change should have major impacts on the different components
of biodiversity, from genes to ecosystems. Marine species, and especially corals, are
already suffering from climate change, as shown by mortality events linked with thermal
anomalies. These events highlighted a diversity of thermotolerance levels in the Mediterranean red coral (Corallium rubrum). The main objective of this work was to understand
the origin of these differences and to search for local adaptation to thermal conditions
in the red coral. This species is present in very contrasted ecological conditions which
correspond to genetically differentiated populations. Moreover, colonies from different
regions, but also from the same site at different depths , display thermotolerance differences. These differences can be linked to the individual history through acclimatization
or to genetic adaptation at the population level. Two complementary approaches were
developed to study these mechanisms: i. Transcriptomic (gene expression and polymorphism) basis of thermotolerance differences. ii. Genomic study of local adaptation. We
looked for genetic-environment associations through the identification of outlier loci
with particular patterns of genetic differentiation using RAD-sequencing (Restriction site
Associated DNA sequencing). For this purpose we chose to compare populations from
above the thermocline which deal with high thermal variations to populations from a
more thermal stable zone below the thermocline. The obtained results are analyzed at
the light of transcriptome polymorphism and plasticity.


VARIABLE REPRODUCTIVE TIMING AND FECUNDITY OF CROWN-OF-THORNS


Understanding the initiation and spread of outbreaks of crown-of-thorns starfish (Acanthaster cf. planci) requires detailed knowledge of their reproductive behavior and output.
While crown-of-thorns starfish are known to have exceptional reproductive potential,
reported estimates of fecundity are based on limited sampling from just one location.
We quantified fecundity for a wide range of individuals collected from the northern
Great Barrier Reef, and showed that fecundity varies enormously with individual size
and condition. This study also examined temporal changes in the reproductive condition of crown-of-thorns starfish collected from the same location every month for 2
years, revealing marked inter-annual differences in spawning behavior. In the first year
of sampling, there was little evidence of any distinct spawning event and females had
consistently large gonads throughout the summer period from November 2013 to April
2014. In 2014/15 however, there was a marked reduction in the size of gonads for females collected in late December versus early January, indicative of extensive spawning
during this period. Variability in reproductive behaviour and output of crown-of-thorns
starfish may account for spatial and temporal differences in the propensity for outbreaks

GALL CRABS, CORALS, AND WHITE PLAGUE; HOW ARE THEY ALL CONNECTED? (Abstract ID: 28340)
Cryptochiridae gall crabs are small crabs that reside on scleractinian corals, altering their
morphology, physiology, and likely their microbiota. Despite their relative abundance, gall
crabs are commonly overlooked in most scleractinian coral studies, and entirely absent
in microbial studies. This aquarium-based study identified the Cryptochiridae gall crab as
a potential disease vector for white plague-like lesions on the scleractinian coralsDiploria
labyrinthiformis and Pseudodiploria strigosa. 16S rRNA gene profiling demonstrated that
labyrinthiformis was significantly different. Manipulative experiments revealed that the
Microbial analysis suggested that a member of theRoseobacter clade may be a potential
crabs of the Cryptochiridae family. This study is the first to examine the microbiota of
the coral-dwelling gall crab, and has identified the gall crab as a potential disease vector
for devastating diseases such as white plague.



BOOSTING CORAL REEF CONSERVATION THROUGH REGIONAL COLLABORATION: A LESSON LEARNED FROM REGIONAL CTI-CFF PARTNERSHIP (Abstract
ID: 27851)

LOCAL HABITAT INFLUENCES THE RESPONSES OF THE LARGE BENTHIC
FORAMINIFERA AMPHISTEGINA LOBIFERA TO THE COMBINED EFFECT OF
ELEVATED TEMPERATURE AND NITRATE (Abstract ID: 28282)

Coral reefs in Asia-Pacific region, particularly in the Coral Triangle area, is one of
the most ecological, biological rich and huge regions on earth, which urgently need a
commitment from people to conserve and protect from increasing potential natural
and anthropogenic threats. Relying upon individual commitment from each country’s to
conserve is challenging as the coral reef ecosystem shows interconnectivity that clearly
region-wide borderless system. At this point, regional initiative becomes fundamental.
CTI-CFF is one of the regional initiatives engaging region-wide marine conservation.
The initiative was established by head of states in May 2009 in Manado, of six-coraltriangle- countries: Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Timor Leste,
and the Solomon Islands, which systematically wrap up individual and nation-wide commitment to region-wide conservation through a Regional Plan of Action. Regional collaboration through CTI-CFF boosts CT-marine protected areas in the view that it is not

Large benthic foraminifera are crucial marine calcifiers in coral reefs, and sensitive to
environmental changes. Yet, many species successfully colonise a wide range of habitats
including marginal and highly fluctuating environments. This study aimed to identify
populations of Amphistegina lobifera that could potentially acclimate to high environmental fluctuations. Specimens were collected from different reef sites on the Great
Barrier Reef (GBR) across a shelf gradient of temperature and nutrients, and exposed to
the combined effects of elevated temperature and nitrate in lab-controlled conditions for
lobifera diatom symbionts to investigate flexibility in symbiotic partnerships. Survivor-

272

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

ship and fecundity varied significantly among reef sites and experimental conditions.
Survivorship was highest (>95%) among inshore reefs exposed to control conditions of
temperature and nitrate, whereas outer-shelf populations showed substantially reduced
survivorship (<25%) when exposed to the combination of elevated experimental conditions. Fecundity was significantly reduced by elevated temperature across the GBR shelf,
assessment of diatom composition showed spatial differences in symbiont community
composition. These preliminary results showed that local habitat is an important factor

CORALLINE ALGAE HOST PHYSIOLOGY, MINERALOGY, AND FUNGAL INFECTION DYNAMICS RESPOND TO TEMPERATURE ANOMALIES AND NATURALLY
VARYING SEAWATER PH (Abstract ID: 29971)
Recent advances in autonomous sensor technology have illuminated the spatio-temporal
complexity of carbonate system dynamics on coral reefs. The consequences for reef
organisms experiencing naturally occurring combinations of elevated temperatures
and/or acidity are unclear. Ecologically important benthic seaweeds – the crustose
coralline algae – which cement coral reefs and attract larvae of reef-building corals,
may respond physiologically to dynamic inorganic carbon diel cycling and temperature
anomalies. By co-locating autonomous pH/T sensors across 10 sites with long-term (>5
yrs) monitoring plots and transplanted specimens, we demonstrate that net calcification rates (linear extension and calcimass), mineralogy (mole fraction Mg) and relative
abundances of coralline algae are positively correlated with the least variable and most
benign physicochemical conditions. Further, coralline fungal disease (CFD) prevalence
and lesion expansion rates (linear) on individual coralline algae hosts are related to
temperature anomalies and can reach 6.5 mm per day. We demonstrate experimentally
that ocean-warming events may increase the frequency of CFD outbreaks on coral reefs,
but that OA-induced lowering of pH may ameliorate outbreaks by slowing progression within a host. Lowered pH may still impact overall host survivorship, however, by
reducing calcification and facilitating fungal bio-erosion. Future research will explore the
role of environmental conditions and host coralline mineralogy on disease transmission,


3D MAPPING OF CORAL REEFS: VISUALIZATION, CHARACTERIZATION, AND
QUANTIFICATION WITH PERMANENT, EXTENSIVE, AND INFORMATION-RICH
VIRTUAL DATA SETS (Abstract ID: 28780)
3D mapping of coral reefs provides a unique virtual record of the spatial relationships
between reef complexity and its related biota. Imagery is collected using digital still
photography and ultra-high definition (4K) videography. Camera arrays can be mounted
on dive scooters, ROVs, or AUV platforms depending upon depth, site conditions and
project needs. The camera array is “flown” at a height of 1-2 above the sea bottom in a
series of overlapping swaths that cover the entire study site. Photographic sequences taken over the reef provide multiple perspectives of the sessile benthic organisms and reef
topographic structure. The application of “structure from motion” computer algorithms
use 100,000s of these photos, for each site to create a 3D point cloud that accurately
records site topography and position and structure of organisms. Point clouds or derived
polygonal mesh models can be analyzed as “virtual” models of reef site. These models
can be used to determine dimensions of organisms and abiotic features. Incorporating
3D mapping in reef monitoring improves precision and accuracy of field surveys. This
computer-based approach captures a permanent record with sufficient detail to perform
statistically robust desk-top analysis of complex ecological data. This permanent, “virtual” record also allows the user to employ various ecological methods integrated on this
permanent record to answer hypothesis-driven, project specific questions. Importantly,
if the questions change in time – so can the resultant, subsequent analysis without the
need to acquire additional data.
