ID: 29118 | Poster ID: 297)
Coral communities providing various micro-habitats and food source for many parasitic
or symbiotic invertebrates showed higher biodiversity index and have been known as
one of the most important habitats than others communities. However, many coral
species are in need of effort for the global conservation and registered in the Red List
of IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources). For
the preparing efficient management method for conservation of coral communities,
it is necessary to generalize overall information about the other parasitic or symbiotic
invertebrates including present condition of distribution and interaction between them,
but many existing methods of taxonomical and ecological researches have been induced
disruptions of coral community habitats. In this study, we improve the existing trap using
light source for the development collecting methods of various invertebrate specimens
without destruction or disturbance in coral communities. The example researches have
been performed from soft coral communities in Jeju Is, South Korea, and can be secure
various small crustaceans, as a result. Considering only amphipods, 46 species assigned
from 41 genera of 30 families are identified, and 13 gammaridean and 10 hyperiid
species can be candidated in new to Korea or new to science among them. Therefore,
it is useful tool to acquire various invertebrate specimens inhabiting coral communities
without damages to habitats and specimens itself.

DISENTANGLING THE ROLE OF HUMAN AND NATURAL DRIVERS OF MULTIPLE REEF REGIMES ACROSS THE HAWAIIAN ARCHIPELAGO (Abstract ID: 29800)
In the face of global change and increasing anthropogenic impacts, there is an urgent
need to understand the human and natural drivers that support or undermine different
reef regimes. A key challenge for coral reef management is to understand how these
different drivers combine and interact to affect coral reef systems. Here, we use one of
the most extensive natural and human driver dataset ever put together for the main Hawaiian Islands, in conjunction with the recent identification and mapping of five distinct
ecological reef regimes occurring across the archipelago. We draw on a combination of
machine learning methods to identify non-linear relationships, quantify the thresholds,
and characterize the interaction patterns that explain the occurrence of the different regimes. The study provides novel insights into the multi-scale dynamics of Hawaiian reef
regimes and allows a comprehensive assessment of what drives them. Results should
aid practitioners and managers to move towards practical implementation of ecosystembased management by helping them understand the combined influence of key anthropogenic (fishing pressure, sedimentation, effluent, habitat modification, invasive species)
and oceanographic (wave energy, chlorophyll-a, irradiance, temperature) drivers.



HOW TO HAVE YOUR FISH AND EAT THEM TOO: MANAGING PERIODICALLY
HARVESTED CLOSURES FOR LONG-TERM SUSTAINABILITY (Abstract ID: 27899)
Periodically harvested closures (PHCs) are small fisheries closures that vary in temporal
duration and harvest regime and are the most common management strategy in locallymanaged marine areas throughout the Pacific. The main motivations for employing
PHCs are to sustain fisheries and increase catch efficiency, which presents a tradeoff. We
present an analytical framework that informed our research to assess whether PHCs can
effectively achieve multiple objectives. We found on average that pre-harvest protection
benefits were greater with: high compliance; bigger, older closures; and high fishing
pressure outside of PHCs. Reduced wariness in targeted fish was more likely to be
observed before increases in abundance or biomass, though harvest events resulted in a
rapid increase in fish wariness. Our theoretical model suggests that when fish behavior is
considered, PHCs can be a more efficient strategy for achieving multiple objectives than
permanent no-take areas or non-spatial management. A literature review revealed that
there were insufficient data to evaluate more complex questions of recovery potential
and whether PHCs can maintain absolute yields. Empirical data from Fiji one year
after harvests show PHCs did not recover to pre-harvest levels or provide post-harvest
recovery benefits for targeted fish. Questions regarding long-term sustainability of PHC
practice are being addressed using simulated fisheries models calibrated with empirical
data to provide guidance on what harvest regimes and relative sizes of PHCs are most
effective for achieving multiple objectives.

REMOTELY PILOTED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS: BRIDGING THE SCALE GAP BETWEEN FIELDWORK AND REMOTE SENSING FOR CORAL REEF MONITORING
(Abstract ID: 28105)
Remote sensing plays a critical role in understanding reef spatial patterns related to
habitat distribution, productivity, geomorphic zonation, bathymetry, water quality, and
water temperature at scales of square meters to square kilometers. Yet while satellites
provide large area coverage at moderate to high spatial resolutions, there is a considerable scale gap between space-based and in-situ ground-based observations. Manned
aircraft can be used as suitable intermediaries, but are expensive. Enter remotely piloted
aircraft systems (RPAS, or drones). Recent technological advances have allowed RPAS
to progress from initially providing highly detailed pictures, to producing highly detailed
maps. Quality sensor miniaturisation also means that RPAS are becoming increasingly
capable of carrying thermal and even hyperspectral sensors, providing a complete
image acquisition package. Here we detail the development two systems providing
niche capabilities with pilot study data presented from Heron and Orpheus Reefs, Great
Barrier Reef. Using a combination of off-the-shelf (3DR Solo + FLIR Vue Pro + Go Pro),
and research systems (Aeronavics Icon + Headwall NanoHyperspec + FLIR A65 +
Sony a7R), we’ll present both thermal and optical data used to assess water temperature

165

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


results show that pH and temperature tolerances in these two coral species depend
strongly on fixed, heritable traits, and suggest that reef-scale resilience to global change
can be driven by rapid, local adaptation among corals.

SEASONAL VARIATION IN CORAL THERMAL PERFORMANCE ON THE GREAT
BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 28957)


Thermal performance curves (TPCs) describe the relation between temperature and the
rate of physiological processes, such as growth and photosynthesis. These relationships
are species-specific and depend on environmental conditions. Previous studies have
shown seasonal variation in coral bleaching thresholds, but it is unknown if this is driven
between winter and summer for a bleaching tolerant coral species, Porites cylindrica,
and a bleaching sensitive coral species, Acropora valenciennesi, from the Great Barrier
Reef. Photosynthesis rates, respiration rates and photosynthetic efficiency (Fv/Fm) were
measured in winter and summer on coral fragments exposed to an acute temperature
increase and decrease up to 5 degrees C above and below the average seawater temperature (24 degrees C in winter and 29 degrees C in summer). In winter, photosynthesis
rates were highest around 24 degrees C, suggesting physiological acclimation that maximises performance at the average temperature of the environment. However, respiration
rates and Fv/Fm were linearly related to temperature suggesting that thermal acclimation does not occur. TPCs measured in summer will be compared with those measured
in winter to assess the magnitude of seasonal acclimation and whether the capacity for
acclimation differs between species. Quantification of TPCs will improve our ability to
project responses of coral populations to climate change by identifying the physiological
processes that underlie thermal acclimation.

BUILDING LOCAL CAPACITY BY INCORPORATING REEF CHECK AMERICAN
| Poster ID: 560)
Our reefs provide a home to a vast assortment of marine life while also supporting a
diverse array of consumptive and non-consumptive human uses. Village communities
in American Samoa have for many years managed their reef areas and enforced their
village rules and regulations. As a tradition, villagers have practiced their traditional
fishing methods when utilizing their reef areas. These safe and effective traditional fishing
practices were often used and the results were plenty of fish and shellfish caught for
family consumption. As the years passed by, the American Samoa has gone through
major changes over the century, as change is inevitable. These changes include new and
advanced fishing methods, rapid growth of population, coastal development, pollution
and overfishing. As a result, increasing demands on have been placed on our near shore
resources that have altered the approaches and perceptions of the local people on using
marine resources to earn more and live better. This project aims to empower youth to
appreciate coral reefs and the marine organisms it supports. Incorporating Reef Check
American Samoa (RCAS) into the Department of Education helped to achieve some of
the objectives stated in the standards and benchmarks for marine science classes. RCAS
helped to teach students in their early age about the importance of coral reefs, different
roles played by different organisms in the reef and carried out simple scientific survey
methods on selected reef fishes, invertebrates and substrates. Students also looked into
some of the human activities that are currently affecting local reefs and participated in
hands-on activities in order to help the community, collecting trash to prevent it from
polluting the water and speaking on the radio about what needs to be done by the community to help save their coral reefs. RCAS aided in the perception of ownership of reefs,
help intensify local management capacity within the communities, and provide a broade


THE HERITIBILITY OF CORAL TOLERANCES TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION
(Abstract ID: 29299 | Poster ID: 41)
The release of carbon dioxide due to human activities is leading to ocean acidification,
which is expected to reduce coral growth rates, but the magnitude of such responses
vary from study to study. Corals upregulate pH at their site of calcification, and some of
the variation reported for coral responses to reduced pH may be the result of differing
capacity to regulate internal chemistry. Heritable variation underlies the potential for
evolution over time, but the degree of variation in pH tolerances among corals, as well
as the heritability of any such variation, is unknown. Here we examine the heritable
variation among eight of the dominant, Hawaiian coral species to ocean acidification
(n = 15 colonies per species). Coral colonies were sampled across natural gradients in
seawater chemistry from a total of six different locations around O’ahu, Hawai’i. Corals
were allowed to acclimate in a common garden for at least 2 months, and then assessed
for their sensitivity to reduced pH in an aquarium experiment.


‘UKU ‘AKO’AKO’A: KIN RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CORAL AND PEOPLE IN
NATIVE HAWAIIAN EPISTEMOLOGY (Abstract ID: 28875)
As the indigenous people of an island chain surrounded by coral reefs in the center of
the Pacific Ocean, Native Hawaiians have profound ancestral and spiritual connections
to the coral. Oli (chants), hula (dances), mele (poetry), and mo’olelo (mythology) of
Hawai’i are vessels of scientific knowledge acquired through observations and test of
time over generations. Many of these forms of knowledge speak to the kin relationship
between the coral, among other organisms, and people. For example, the Kumulipo,
a chant that traced the genealogy of the chief Lonoikamakahiki to the environmental
deities, describe the coral as the first-born organism in the Hawaiian universe. Another
chant ‘Uku ‘Āko’ako’a further expands this ancestral presence of coral to growth of
coral reefs as metaphors of personal growth. A hula, I Kanaloa ‘o Kanaloa, speak of
primordial presence of the ocean in Hawaiian people’s psyche that is embodied by the
coral. The four cohorts of students of a class called “Kū’ula: Integrated Science” at the
University of Hawai’i at Hilo have developed ways to integrate Native Hawaiian and
Western sciences to understand the environment of Hawai’i to manage it in ways that
integrate natural and human dimensions. We will present a Native Hawaiian understanding of the intersection of natural and human dimensions pertaining to the coral in the
hula and chant formats.


LOCAL ADAPTATION DRIVES CORAL RESILIENCE TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION
AND CLIMATE CHANGE (Abstract ID: 29277)
Mass coral bleaching events are expected to become more common as the climate
warms, but the long-term trajectories of bleached and non-bleached corals may be impacted by ocean acidification. In response to a mass bleaching event during September
2014 in Hawai’i, bleached and non-bleached colonies of the corals Montipora capitata
and Porites compressa were sampled from a low-pH, high-temperature environment
in Kane’ohe Bay, and from a nearby, normal-pH, normal-temperature environment off
Waimanalo. To examine the effects of ocean acidification on bleaching recovery, corals
were exposed to two levels of pH in an aquarium experiment for 12 months using
flow-through, Kane’ohe Bay seawater, and the parent colonies sampled in Kane’ohe Bay
were tagged and monitored for recovery under natural, field conditions (n = 6 colonies
for each set of conditions). A second mass bleaching event occurred in September 2015,
allowing us to examine the influences of both fixed and plastic responses by corals to repeated temperature stress. Corals from the low-pH, high-temperature site, Kane’ohe Bay,
showed higher tolerances to low pH and elevated temperature as compared to those
from Waimanalo. Likewise, bleaching responses were consistent across years among
coral colonies from Kane’ohe Bay, both in the field and in the aquariums. Together these


TAGGING BONEFISH IN HAWAII: EMPOWERING ANGLERS IN SCIENCE (Abstract
ID: 29269)
‘Ō’io (bonefish) were important to early Hawaiian culture and are one of the most highly
sought after recreational fisheries species in modern day Hawaii. Two species of ‘ō’io
inhabit Hawaiian waters and are targeted by a mix of commercial and recreational
fisheries. The ‘Ō’io Tagging Project arose from a consensus that collecting biological
and fisheries data on ‘ō’io is essential to properly manage this resource, while engaging
resource users and disseminating this knowledge back to them is equally as important
for long-term sustainability of these fisheries. Outreach events allow for interaction with
anglers and the project’s mission is manifest through magazine articles, social media, scientific publications, and an interactive website. Since 2003, more than 870 anglers have
recorded over 11,000 fishing hours, while tagging 3,500 and recapturing 85 ‘ō’io. Tagged

166

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

‘ō’io exhibited extremely high site fidelity, with 80% recaptured less than 1 km from their
original tagging location. Angler participation and collaboration has extended the project
to provide the opportunity to study diet, age, growth, and reproduction. This project
serves as an excellent vehicle to include resource users in collecting species-specific life
history information and fisheries data that can be used in population assessments and
management decisions.


SPONGES AS A MICROHABITAT FOR MACROFAUNA AND MICROBES ACROSS
ECOLOGICAL GRADIENTS IN THE CENTRAL RED SEA (Abstract ID: 29140)
Sponges act as important microhabitats and promote biodiversity by harboring a
wide variety of macrofauna and microbiota, but little is known about the relationships
between the sponges and their symbionts. This study uses DNA barcoding to examine
the macrofaunal communities associated with sponges of the central Saudi Arabian
Red Sea, an understudied ecosystem with high biodiversity and endemism. In total, 185
epifaunal and infaunal operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were distinguished from the
1399 successfully-sequenced macrofauna individuals from 129 sponges representing
seven sponge species, one of which (Stylissa carteri) was intensively studied. A significant
difference was found in the macrofaunal community composition of Stylissa carteri along
a cross-shelf gradient, and sponge abundance increased with proximity to shore. The
difference in macrofaunal communities of several species of sponges sampled from
one location was found to be significant as well, using OTU presence (binary Jaccard
diversity index). Four of the seven sponge species collected were dominated by a
single annelid OTU, each unique to one sponge species. A fifth was dominated by four
arthropod OTUs, all species-specific as well. Results will also be presented based on the
diversity of the microbial communities found in the sponge samples. As climate change
and ocean acidification continue to modify coral reef ecosystems, understanding the
ecology of sponges and their role as microhabitats may become more important.


HIGH-ENERGY WINDOW IN MODERN REEFS: AN EXAMPLE FROM MULTIBEAM BATHYMETRIC MAPPING OF REEF GEOMORPHOLOGY AROUND THE
RYUKYU ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 28111)
Accurate descriptions of coral reef geomorphology improve our understanding of reef
environments. Since 2010 we have been conducting high-resolution multibeam bathymetric surveys around the Ryukyu Islands, southern Japan, and mapping the coral reef
geomorphology with a horizontal grid size of 1–2 m. Here, we introduce our mapping
project, which covers of a total of 39 surveyed areas across five islands, and present an
example illustrating the barrier reef and island shelf geomorphology of eastern Kume Island (1.8 × 6.5 km bathymetric area, with a depth range of 0.4–161.3 m) combined with
SCUBA and VTR observations. The bathymetric area comprises two contrasting reef
edge formations: a double reef in the western area, and a deep breakwater reef in the
eastern area. The latter shows the high-energy window condition which is accompanied
by spur and groove formation in the lagoon, formation of circular spits or bowl-shaped
depressions behind the lagoon patch reefs, and traces of movement of coral boulders in
the lagoon following typhoon storm surges. These observations enable us to understand
and reconstruct the paleo-geomorphology and sedimentology in reefs associated with
the Holocene high-energy window, and can also contribute to predictions of coastal
environmental change associated with future sea level rise. On the island shelf, we
observed five reef terraces at depths between 80 and 95 m, and isolated patch reefs at
135 m depth. The discovery of these features may contribute to reconstructions of past
sea level and reef growth in the northwestern Pacific.


EVALUATING POTENTIAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING TROPHIC ASSEMBLAGE SHIFTS IN REEF FISHES FROM SHALLOW TO MESOPHOTIC DEPTHS
Herbivorous reef fishes are considered integral components of healthy coral reef ecosystems, yet initial studies of mesophotic coral reefs (>30m) indicate vast reductions in
herbivorous reef fish communities compared to their shallow congeners despite observations of high algal abundance at mesophotic depths. Preliminary hypotheses regarding
the reduction in herbivorous fishes with depth propose that 1) decreased light levels
may reduce habitat quality, 2) reductions in water temperature inhibits fishes’ digestion
of algal tissues, and 3) algal abundances are reduced or chemically defended on deep
reefs. We conducted surveys along stratified depth gradients in West Hawaii to assess
variability in reef fish trophic assemblages, temperature, and habitat metrics with depth.
We then conducted choice experiments to determine the palatability of common algal
species in mesophotic depths. Our findings support previous studies of reduced herbivorous reef fish abundances with depth, yet the absence of herbivores at depth does
not appear to be associated with variations in temperature, habitat complexity or turf
algal cover. Instead, herbivore reductions were positively associated with reductions in
coral cover and negatively associated with increasing macroalgal cover with depth. Algal
choice experiments revealed that deep algal species are edible and quickly consumed by
shallow herbivorous fishes. These findings suggest changes in herbivore populations with
depth are more complex than habitat quality, temperature, or food availability previously
hypothesized.


CORALSPEQ AND PHOTOSYNQ: AN OPEN, FIELD-DISTRIBUTABLE PLATFORM FOR
PROBING CORAL HEALTH ON LOCAL AND GLOBAL SCALES (Abstract ID: 29910)
We have developed an inexpensive but sophisticated field-portable instrument, called
CoralspeQ, that dramatically lowers the entry barriers making detailed phenotypic measurements of coral host and its symbiotic algae (as well as other marine photosynthetic
organisms) to enable researchers, park rangers and citizen scientists all over the world
to probe coral health and the factors that may affect bleaching. CoralspeQ measures
spectroscopic properties (both reflectance and fluorescence) under a range of excitation
conditions to estimate pigment composition and photosynthetic properties. CoralspeQ is
open-source, highly affordable, easy to use and highly expandable. Data from field sites
are instantly uploaded to PhotosynQ for both local and global data analyses to reveal
new trends that can be used to assess the progress of coral bleaching, test mechanistic
hypotheses, and ultimately lead to new coral conservation approaches. Tests in the
field and laboratory showed that we could use the signals generated by CoralspeQ to
distinguish between “stressed” and healthy corals (See presentation by Ralph et al.). This
presentation will describe demonstrations, opportunities to test the platform live and


UNWINDING THE MYSTERY OF CORAL BROADCAST MASS SPAWNING,
SIGNALING CASCADES AND THE IMPORTANCE OF MOONLIGHT (Abstract ID:
28571)
The geophysical cycles in our planet Earth are mirrored in evolving endogenous clocks
allowing organisms to anticipate daily and seasonal rhythms and to adjust their biochemical, physiological and behavioural processes accordingly. Many corals participate
in a yearly cycle known as the mass-spawning event. This reproductive event is one of
earth’s most prominent examples of synchronised behaviour and coral reproductive success is vital to the persistence of coral reef ecosystems. Although several environmental
cues have been implicated in the timing of mass spawning, the specific sensory cues
that function together with endogenous clock mechanisms to ensure accurate timing of
gamete release are largely unknown. Recently we have characterized the transcriptomes
external stimulus for mass spawning synchrony and describe the potential mechanisms
for the signalling cascades that ultimately result in gamete release. We identify transcripts


167

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

a long-range cue, it might still be useful for near-reef orientation at night or for habitat
selection within a reef.

that vary only on the spawning night, with upregulation of light-sensing molecules and
rhodopsin-like receptors that initiate different signaling cascades such as the glutamate
pathway, SMAD signaling pathway, WNT signaling pathway, neuroactive ligand-receptor
interaction and calcium signaling. These signaling pathways are involved in cell cycling,
cell movement, tissue polarity, focal adhesion and cytoskeleton reorganization, which
together, lead to gamete release.



RECOVERY AND REORGANISATIONS OF CORAL REEFS DUE TO THE COMBINED EFFECT OF OCEAN WARMING AND ACIDIFICATION IN THE GULF OF
MANNAR AND PALK BAY, INDIA (Abstract ID: 29414)

VISUALIZING THE 3D SPATIAL DYNAMICS OF CHEMICAL AND MICROBIAL
SIGNATURES ON CORALS (Abstract ID: 28380 | Poster ID: 108)

Episodic bleaching phenomena occurred around the globe since 1998 recurrently
including India. Recurrent bleaching incidences resulted in the loss of live coral cover
along with the changes in the coral community structure of the reefs. After the 1998 and
2002 massive bleaching phenomena in the Gulf of Mannar and the adjacent Palk Bay,
significant recovery of live coral cover was observed. Conversely, after the 2005, 2006,
2010 and 2013 bleaching incidences, coral cover has continued to decline in response to
multiple smaller bleaching events in the Palk bay reefs and Gulf of Mannar. Despite the
severity of bleaching, recovery of coral species belongs to the families such as Porites,
Favites, Montastrea, Favia, Platygyra, Symphillia and Goniastrea have been recorded.
However, significant decline was also observed among the dominant reef builders
belong to the families viz., Acropora, Montipora, Pocillopora and Galaxea in the reefs of
Palk bay and some reefs in the Gulf of Mannar after successive bleaching events. In spite
of the catastrophic bleaching events and associated triggering factors such as ocean
acidification, data sets of the biophysical status of corals from 1996 to till date revealed
that the transition of coral reef ecosystem with slight changes in the ecosystem functions
in the reefs of Gulf of Mannar and Palk Bay is evident. The study also stressed the need
for strong commitment and management towards maintain ecosystem services of the
coral reef ecosystem of the Gulf of Mannar Marine Biosphere Reserve and Palk Bay
resilience by restoring healthy levels of herbivory, macroalgal cover, streamlining the
fishing practices and monitor the coral recruitment.

Coral reefs are one of the planet’s most threatened marine ecosystems. Similar to
other animals, corals possess a highly complex microbial community that facilitates
optimal physiological function for both themselves and their surrounding environment.
Unexpected microbial and chemical shifts can have severe consequences on the survival
of corals, and thus the entire ecosystem. The development and implementation of
innovative macro- and micro-scale imaging mass spectrometry tools has allowed for
rapid identification of chemical signatures from organisms. This technology has been
combined with emerging photogrammetric techniques to provide, for the first time, 3D
spatial visualization of coral molecular features. Molecular profiles were obtained from
the interaction among several species of Hawaiian corals. Distinct diurnal metabolic
patterns were observed in the Montipora capitata coral affected with tumor-like lesions.
Using open-sourced metabolomic profiling tools, such as Global Natural Product Social
were identified. Furthermore, by combining imaging mass spectrometry and 16s
microbial profiling, correlations between coral metabolites and the spatial distribution
of bacterial communities throughout the coral colony surface were characterized in 3D
space. By implementing a highly interdisciplinary analytical workflow in chemistry, biology and virtual reality technologies, this study provides an innovative platform to better
understand the molecular space of complex coral ecosystems.



CORAL REEF SOUNDSCAPES MAY NOT BE DETECTABLE FAR FROM THE REEF
(Abstract ID: 28064)

WORKING TOGETHER TO UNDERSTAND, QUANTIFY AND MANAGE FOR TIPPING POINTS ON THE REEFS OF HAWAII (Abstract ID: 30096 | Poster ID: 590)

Biological sounds produced on coral reefs may help pelagic larvae identify suitable
settlement habitat. Evidence that reef sound may play such a role has been unearthed in
several studies. Some coral reefs may also be high amplitude sources, suggesting that this
sound could be a long-range settlement cue. To date there have only been a small number of studies that have explored how far sound pressure might propagate. In addition
to pressure, sound fields are composed of particle motion, which is the vibratory back
and forth movement of acoustic particles and the component of the sound field that
most fishes and invertebrates are able to detect. However, there are no field measurements of particle motion propagation. To address this deficiency, both sound pressure
and particle motion were recorded at a range of distances from one Hawaiian reef at
dawn (to capture fish choruses) and mid-morning (as a comparison) on three separate
days. Sound pressure attenuated with distance from the reef at dawn but not during the
mid-morning. Similar trends were apparent for particle velocity but with more variability.
Average levels were low and perhaps too faint to be used as an orientation cue over long
distances. However, individual transient sounds, which exceeded the mean values by up
to an order of magnitude, might be detectable at greater distances from the reef, depending on their attributes and the hearing abilities of the larva. If sound is not being used as

Tipping points occur when small shifts in human pressures or environmental conditions
bring about large, sometimes abrupt changes in a system – whether in a human society,
an ecosystem or our planet’s climate. This talk introduces the Ocean Tipping Points
project, a multi-year, multi-organization effort to advance our understanding of abrupt
shifts in marine ecosystems and improve ocean management. We present results of
our research on ecosystem shifts on reefs of Hawaii and discuss implications for reef
management and the benefits of collaborative engagement between scientists and practitioners. In this multi-sector, interdisciplinary collaboration, scientists and governmental
and non-governmental experts are working together to better understand complex reef
ecosystems and develop management tools to sustain them. By integrating an unprecedented body of newly synthesized benthic and fish community data and novel, spatially
explicit datasets representing environmental and anthropogenic drivers, we provide
evidence for the existence of multiple reef regimes across the Main Hawaiian Islands
and nonlinear relationships between regimes and their drivers. These quantified threshold responses of reef state to multiple stressors provide a useful set of reference points
to inform targets for reef protection and restoration. Using tradeoff models we examine
costs and benefits of different management actions aimed at reaching those targets. We


THREE CORAL HEALTH PROJECTS IN COLLABORATION WITH NOAA EDUCATIONAL PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM (Abstract ID: 28168 | Poster ID: 684)
NOAA’s Office of Education has several programs, one is the Educational Partnership
Program (EPP) where NOAA scientists submit proposed opportunities for students participation in various projects. If selected, the NOAA opportunity is circulated among students
associated with four focused centers and corresponding NOAA line offices; the Environmental Cooperative Science Center (ECSC) / NOS, the NOAA Center for Atmospheric Science (NCAS) / NWS, the Cooperative Remote Sensing Science and Technology (CREST)
/ NESDIS, and the Living Marine Resources Cooperative Science Center (LMRCSC) /
projects address the goals of bridging science to management and policy.

168

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

had a structural canopy of >60 cm. However, the peacock grouper (Cephalopholis argus)
dominated species assemblage across the gradient. We explored mechanisms of behavioral
structural threshold. Territory sizes increase exponentially as prey and competitor densities
modifying its foraging mode from a structure-dependent ‘ambush’ to a structure-independent ‘widely- foraging’ mode. The ability to maintain trophic position with behavioral flexibility may be a key trait, allowing species to adapt to structurally declining reefs. With rapid
environmental change, these adaptable species may perform important predatory functions,
maintaining the overall resilience of reefs.

conclude by demonstrating how these analyses are supporting efforts to mitigate local
stresses and enhance resilience of Hawaiian reefs.

PREDICTING CLIMATE IMPACTS ON HAWAIIAN CORAL REEF FISHERIES:
ARE CONTEMPORARY SPATIAL MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES SUSTAINABLE?
(Abstract ID: 28214)
Simulation models of coral reef ecosystems predict severe negative ecological responses to climate change. We evaluate the potential consequences of spatial harvesting
strategies for tropical reef fisheries of the Hawaiian Islands under two IPCC climate scenarios that accounted for spatial heterogeneity in environmental forcing functions, including climate change-mediated disturbances and nutrification from terrestrial run-off. We
simulated a suite of scenarios to test the interaction between the proportion of marine
habitat area closed to fishing (as no-take MPAs) at 0%, 10%, or 20%, habitat loss from
coral bleaching, and the effect of elevated nutrients on interference competition between
benthic functional groups, at a 100 year time horizon. We found that the establishment
of MPAs increased both biomass and catch of reef fish across all functional groups
(herbivorous, small piscivorous, and large piscivorous) for all scenarios as a shift from
coral-dominated to algae-dominated habitats drove a lagged increase in herbivorous fish
populations and their predators. However, heightened nutrification of the same reefs
protected from fishing resulted in a diminished protection effect, rendering coral and
macroalgal cover in high-nutrient, high MPA proportion scenarios similar to low-nutrient
scenarios with far less fishing protection. A future wherein reefs retain low coral cover
and a functional biomass of herbivores is demonstrated as possible in the context of
spatial fishery management under climate change.


CHARACTERIZING CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF SIZE-FRACTIONATED
PARTICULATE ORGANIC MATTER IN A FRINGING CORAL REEF OF MALAYSIA
(Abstract ID: 29146 | Poster ID: 218)
Particulate organic matter (POM) is comprised of microplankton, nanoplankton and
picoplankton depending on its size definition. It is assumable that each fraction has different compositions of organisms such as phytoplankton, flagellates and bacteria due to their
size ranges. Our goal of this study is to characterize the size-fractionated POM by chemical compositions, especially organic compounds and stable isotopes. Seawater samples
were collected at Bidong Island, Malaysia (tropical), Sesoko Island (subtropical) and
Sagami Bay (temperate), Japan in 2014 and 2015. Seawater was filtered through nylon
meshes with different pore sizes: 2, 20, 100 and 180 µm. POM in each size fraction was
collected on GF/F filters. Organic compounds were detected and identified by pyrolysis
gas chromatography/mass spectrometer, and stable isotopes were measured by elemental analyzer/isotopic ratio mass spectrometer. The concentration of chlorophyll-a (chl-a)
was measured by a fluorometer. In all the studied sites, the smallest size fraction indicated
the highest chl-a concentrations, implying a large contribution of cyanobacteria. In Bidong
Island, there were no significant differences in stable carbon isotopic values among the
size fractions. On the other hand, the stable carbon isotopic values values in Sesoko Island
and Sagami Bay were significantly different between the fractions larger and smaller than
20 µm. Our results implied that the difference in organic matter composition of POM
could be well characterized by the abundance of micro- and nano-plankton.


THE EVOLUTION OF BEST PRACTICES TO PREVENT, ASSESS, AND MITIGATE
CORAL REEF IMPACTS IN THE ATLANTIC/CARIBBEAN (Abstract ID: 29655)
Large-scale coastal development and infrastructure projects have and will continue to
result in considerable loss of coral reef habitats world-wide. Best practices for coral reef
impact avoidance, assessment, and mitigation options have evolved considerably in
recent years in the Atlantic/Caribbean. However, caution is needed in applying impact
assessment design achievements from one project to others as regional and local differences in oceanographic conditions and habitat types may require adjustments in order
to replicate the initial success. Effectively capturing lessons from planned projects and
socializing the lessons learned with participants involved in the planning process is also
essential to ensuring projects are designed in a manner that prevents and minimizes
coral reef impacts to the extent possible. The progress made in these areas in the Atlantic/Caribbean is applicable to other coral reef regions.


ID: 28533 | Poster ID: 487)


In the aim of enlarging coral distribution, a coral transplantation suitability study was
conducted at the inner reef of Okinotorishima,which is located at the southernmost
end of Japan. The study was carried out by superimposing the coral distribution on the
habitat conditions in the coral reef by using GIS (Geographic Information System). The
following four conditions are ideal for selecting transplantation. (A) Suitable locations
for coral to habit. These locations were selected from high coral coverage places, places
of less high water temperature frequency, and low stress places counted by Shields
numbers which indicate the movement of gravel. (B) Locations where the coral coverage
temporarily declined. These were selected from places where the coral coverage temporarily declined according to secular-change comparison by satellite image analysis. (C)
Locations where transplanted corals could work as a source of coral larvae. These were
selected by using larvae diffusion simulation. (D) Locations where ideal substrates for
coral exist. These were selected from places where there are knolls that are higher than
50cm from the seafloor, which is higher than the inhabit height of the likes of Acropora
tenuis – the objectives of the transplantation. Based on a result of the study, the coral
transplantation has been conducted from 2014 once year. Transplantations for 400 colonies have been carried out and the survival rate maintains high state. Monitoring after the
transplantation and adaptive management will continue into the future.

SHOULD ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY AND ADVOCACY FOCUS ON THRESHOLDS OR DEGRADATION? (Abstract ID: 30148)
Uncertainty is unavoidable when addressing the threats posed by everything from
greenhouse gas emissions, to nutrient pollution, to ocean acidification. Unfortunately
that uncertainty can be used as an excuse for not taking action. Inspired by some game
theoretic results, we examine several case studies to determine whether focusing on degradation with uncertainty about its magnitude or focusing on thresholds with uncertainty
about where those thresholds lie differ in their ability to promote action and appropriate
policy responses. While our case studies are drawn from a wide variety of systems, they
apply to how we approach the management and conservation of coral reefs.

COPING WITH CATASTROPHE: BEHAVIORAL FLEXIBILITY ENABLES A LONGLIVED BENTHIC PISCIVORE TO SURVIVE IN RAPIDLY DEGRADING REEFS
(Abstract ID: 28636)


Coral reefs have rapidly lost their architectural complexity in the last two decades from
repeated mass-bleaching catastrophes. Understanding the ability of species to cope with
this change is critical to determine winners and losers in the face of climate change. To
understand which species are surviving in degrading coral reefs, we studied the distribution
of a guild of structure-dependent, long-lived predators (groupers) in the Lakshadweep archipelago, along a gradient of reef structure, which has declined with repeated disturbances
since 1998. Three of the six most abundant grouper species were seen only in reefs which
169

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

COMMUNITY AND ECOSYSTEM ASPECTS OF THE RECOVERY OF ATLANTIC
ACROPORID CORALS: SCIENCE IN SUPPORT OF STEPWISE STEWARDSHIP
GOALS (Abstract ID: 28926)

A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF MOLECULAR PHYLOGENY AND SEXUAL REPRODUCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS IN ZOANTHUS KUROSHIO(HEXACORALLIA,
ZOANTHARIA, ZOANTHIDAE) (Abstract ID: 28757 | Poster ID: 70)

The science of species recovery for the Caribbean acroporid corals has focused largely
on propagation and survival of individual coral colonies, leaving to later the process of
restoring and maintaining the coral reef community as a whole. Later is now. We detail a
recovery process that begins with acroporid restoration and culminates in the restoration
of west Atlantic coral reef ecosystem services in an era of anthropogenic climate change
momentum. The steps in this process are: (1) restoration of self-sustaining populations of
the two acroporid species and their hybrid; (2) acroporid restoration triggers reassembly of
a web of ecological interactions similar to reef surface dynamics prior to 1980; (3) resumption of framework construction sufficient to keep pace with sea level rise, by acroporids
in concert with other framework-builders; and (4) ensurance that restored reef surface
framework-building communities and their suite of associated species can sustain and
renew themselves spontaneously through an at least several century-long climate recovery
period. We critically examine the field interventions and science required to achieve each
of these four milestones, assess potentially acceptable alternative outcomes, and consider
the enabling environment of laws and actions essential for any of this to occur.

Genus Zoanthus (Hexacorallia, Zoantharia, Zoanthidae) spp. are widespread, zooxanthellate, colonial benthos. In coral reefs, they are common from intertidal zone to 30 m
offshore. Occasionally, they have large influence on neighboring benthos by limiting
space availability. Research on Zoanthusspp. sexual and asexual reproduction is only
fragmentary, and more work is needed to understand their dynamics within coral reef
ecosystems. Zoanthus kuroshio is abundant in the intertidal zone of Okinawa island,
colony sexuality, gametogenesis periods, and spawning timing in Okinawa island. Results
hermaphrodites, and we observed colonies of three different sexualities; males, females
and hermaphrodites. Spawning timing did not overlap between the colonies of each
sexuality, and hence it can be thought that there was reproductive isolation between
Accordingly, we conducted phylogenetic analyses of nuclear ribosomal ITS and 18S and
mitochondrial 16S sequences. We discuss how the molecular phylogeny reflects sexual
reproductive characteristics in the tagged colonies.



MODELS OF CORAL DEMOGRAPHY DURING REEF RECOVERY PROVIDE
QUANTITATIVE PROJECTIONS OF CORAL COMMUNITY TRAJECTORIES AND
ESTIMATES OF REEF RESILIENCE (Abstract ID: 28487)

SURVIVORS OF ACROPORA MURICATA COLONIES IMPACTED BY DRUPELLA
CORNUS OCCURRING UNDERNEATH PADINA BORYANA: IMPLICATIONS FOR
MULTIPLE STRESSORS MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 29579 | Poster ID: 419)

Coral reefs are inherently resilient to perturbations. Yet coral populations are declining
in many places. The question why is this so has focused much attention on identifying
underlying drivers of reef resilience. How coral communities respond to disturbance
appears to depend on complex interactions of abiotic and biotic processes acting at
multiple scales. Understanding these processes quantitatively requires an approach that
integrates empirical individual-level demography with population simulations designed to
elucidate community dynamics. We used an Integral Projection Model (IPM) framework
to investigate the drivers of coral community recovery in Moorea, French Polynesia.
Reefs there are recovering from disturbances that decimated coral populations, providing
an excellent model system to evaluate mechanisms influencing early-stage community
recovery and longer-term resilience. We quantified recruitment, growth and survival of
the three dominant coral genera over multiple spatial scales during the first 5 years of
reef recovery. We used estimates of coral performance to construct an IPM that predicts community trajectories based on the population dynamics of the three genera. Our
results indicate that spatial variability in coral recruitment, species’ life histories, densitydependent regulation and local reef environment interact at different scales to influence
recovery. Our approach provides the foundation to quantitatively evaluate the degree to
which coral communities are resilient, and to predict the effects of future disturbances
such as mass bleaching events.

The density of the corallivorous marine snail Drupella cornus and the percentage of
Acropora muricata colonies in the coastal zone covered by the macroalga Padina boryana
were studied over summer (March) and winter (August) months of the years 1998 and
in summer (17.00-30.60 m-2; 62.22-93.33%) than in winter (0.40-5.20 m-2; 15.56-26.67%), on
especially in summer. Although the coastal coral colonies have been reported to be less

POLICY DEVELOPMENT ON IMPLEMENTING AN ECOSYSTEM APPROACH
TO FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN MALAYSIA IN FULFILLING OBLIGATIONS
UNDER THE CORAL TRIANGLE INITIATIVE (Abstract ID: 28374)


Increased understanding of the interactions among different marine ecosystem components such as fish, people, habitats, and climate has led to the recognition and adoption of
the Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM) in the Coral Triangle Initiative (CTI). EAFM extends beyond fish in the seas and people in boats, to a marine environment that includes coral reefs and mangroves, and human activities covering fishers,
fishing communities, and coastal development. Target 1 of Goal 2 under CTI stresses on
implementation of EAFM through the adoption and implementation of strong legislative,
policy, and regulatory frameworks. While Malaysia has generally been proactive in integrating EAFM into the country’s natural resource regime, beginning with initiatives in Sabah, progress has been generally slow in incorporating the required changes into national
policies and regulations. The experience however shows that EAFM can be scaled-up
from existing pilot sites or localized management to a broader implementation strategy.
Although EAFM implementation is usually deemed the responsibility of fishery agencies,
its full implementation at the national level requires coordination and cooperation with
other agencies and stakeholders responsible for managing related activities that impact on
the marine ecosystem. Successful EAFM fisheries management initiatives in Malaysia are
to be further raised by studying the dynamics of marine ecosystems, developing indices
of ecosystem health, and setting management targets as a way forward.

ECO-TECHNOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT OF ATOLL ISLANDS AGAINST SEA
LEVEL RISE (Abstract ID: 28577)
Atoll countries occupy low, narrow islands and are very vulnerable to sea level rise.
However, the current problems of inundation and beach erosion reported to occur in
atoll island countries result mainly either from natural processed or from local problems
associated with concentration of the population to the capital islands. Atoll islands
are formed by geo-ecological processes of coral and foraminifer production and their
sedimentation. Deterioration of coral reef ecosystem has lead to degradation of reef
formation potential to keep up with the rising sea and reduction of sand production
to form the islands. Causeways between islands and jetties constructed perpendicular
to coastlines prohibit sand transportation. Vertical seawalls do not enhance but inhibit
sand sedimentation. These local problems decrease geo-ecological resilience to future
accelerating sea level rise. For wise management of atoll island countries against sea
level rise, ecosystem-based management including rehabilitation of the damaged coral
reefs and minimum control of wave and current to enhance accumulation of sediment
above high water level is fundamental together with grey (concrete) technology. Any grey
countermeasure plans must not contradict the natural production, transportation and
170

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

of marine science and marine resource management, including traditional and modern
use and stewardship. The term “’Ike Kai” means “to know, feel, experience, be aware,
and comprehend the ocean”. The ‘Ike Kai curriculum was designed to inform monitoring
projects, outreach activities, and marine fishery and habitat conservation projects being
undertaken by these communities while strengthening the relationship with resource
management agencies. To make the curriculum training relevant to each unique community, place-based material including a field kit to support outreach and monitoring
activities were provided to each group. Future uses include creating an online version as
a tool Environmental Court judges can use when sentencing first time resource violators
in Environmental Court.

sedimentation processes. The measures must be instituted with appropriate governance
that incorporates traditional forms in the context of the globalized economy and society.


VISUAL DECISION TOOLS: AN INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUE FOR BUILDING
OCEAN LITERACY (Abstract ID: 28519)

DIFFERENT LEVELS OF ANTRHOPOGENIC IMPACT INFLUENCE CORAL
LARVAE SETTLEMENT AND RELATED BACTERIAL BIOFILM COMMUNITIES IN
THE SPERMONDE ARCHIPELAGO, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 29399)

Visual Decision Tools are interrogated via a visual index rather than read - think Visual
Hyperlinking - and can be in digital or print form. They have the potential to empower
individuals to rapidly interrogate factual information and solve complex problems
without the need for formal knowledge or prior training. Applications include marine
identification and capacity building for reef monitoring and conservation. Following
6-years of testing by the Coral Identification Capacity Building Program, we demonstrate how Visual Decision Tools achieve dramatic improvements in a user’s capacity to
identify corals using the Coral Finder. Results from workshops in the Indo-Pacific show
how this approach instantly empowers non-coral specialists with minimal training. Coralspecialists also benefited from the process. Key learnings were used in the design of the
Reef Finder - a Visual Decision Tool that enables the user to put any reef organism into
a taxonomic group and give visible reasons why. Results are presented showing how the
Reef Finder’s visual approach dramatically builds the capacity of individuals to recognise
a broad range of fish and invertebrate groups with little training or formal knowledge.
a visual index can be a powerful way to add ease-of-use to information arranged in
traditional alphabetical or hierarchical structures. Users of Visual Decision Tools are
enthused by the instant success they can achieve. Design guidelines are presented for
implementation in print, web and app.

Recruitment of coral larvae is one of the key factors for coral reef recovery. Settlement
cues emitted from bacterial biofilms play a vital part in larval settlement and metamorphosis. These cues depend largely on the community composition of the biofilms, which
can change drastically with altered environmental conditions and in turn may affect
larval settlement behavior. This study investigated bacterial community composition and
coral larvae settlement at three sites with differing distance from shore, and thus different
levels of human impact and water quality, in the Spermonde Archipelago, Indonesia.
Bacteria and coral larvae were investigated on natural reef substrate and artificial
ceramic tiles. Bacterial communities were comprised largely of Gammaproteobacteria,
Alphaproteobacteria, Cyanobacteria and Flavobacteria and were strongly correlated with
water quality and benthic community composition. No coral recruits were found at the
inshore site with the highest anthropogenic impact. Between the other two sites coral
recruitment was similar. Path analysis modelling revealed that coral recruitment was
influenced directly by water quality and the bacterial community composition, as well as
indirectly due to the influence of water quality on the bacterial community. This study
shows that negative anthropogenic influences on water quality affect bacterial community compositions and in turn coral larvae recruitment. It also highlights the importance
of taking these often neglected factors into account in evaluating the recovery potential
of coral reefs.


MODELING MARINE METAPOPULATION CONNECTIVITY: UNDERSTANDING
OCEANOGRAPHIC AND LIFE HISTORY INTERACTIONS ACROSS MULTIPLE
SPATIAL SCALES (Abstract ID: 29805 | Poster ID: 520)


CAN COMPETITION MAINTAIN BIOGEOGRAPHIC BORDERS? (Abstract ID: 28349)

Assessing the degree of connectivity within and among reef sites in a metapopulation is
central to understanding persistence of species that inhabit patchy ecosystems. Larval
dispersal is determined by numerous oceanographic and biological processes that
operate at multiple spatial and temporal scales. Therefore, the probability of successful
dispersal, both locally and regionally, may not be simply a function of distance from natal
site. This relationship is examined by analyzing the degree of connectivity of the Orange
clownfish Amphiprion percula at two spatial scales (around-island and bay-wide) in
Kimbe Bay, Papua New Guinea. Comparing the observed natal-to-settlement events to
all possible anemone-to-anemone connections reveals that there is bias towards shorter
dispersal distances at the local around-island (up to 1 km) scale in three different years
despite potentially variable oceanographic conditions. Bay-wide (up to 100 km) connectivity is also a regular occurrence, with exchange of larvae across some of the more
distant anemones. These observations of larval dispersal across coral reef habitats are
compared to oceanographic transport estimates from a biophysical model that examines
the interplay of ocean circulation and life history. Temporal and spatial variability of
oceanographic transport can generate directional and episodic patterns of connectivity even in systems that appear well mixed by eddies. Larval survival and pelagic larval
duration also play a critical role in marine metapopulation dynamics of organisms with
a bipartite life cycle.

The role for species interactions in the generation and maintenance of biogeographic
borders, where multiple species range edges meet, is unclear. Progress has been hindered
by an over-reliance on indirect inference and the use of low-resolution, opportunistic
data. To determine the role of competition more explicitly, we are collecting small
grain behavioural data across a large geographic extent at biogeographic borders. We
target these locations because sister species that have evolved allopatrically in adjacent
biogeographical provinces are hypothesised to compete strongly on secondary contact,
potentially explaining why these species do not further expand their ranges. Moreover,
we might also expect these species to be more aggressive at range boundaries compared
with widespread species that traverse biogeographic regions. We test these ideas with
Indo-Pacific butterflyfishes (Chaetodontidae). Butterflyfish sister species typically have
one species in each of two major biogeographic provinces - the Indian Ocean and the
Pacific Ocean - and co-occur at contact zones around a few small islands between these
provinces. We visited three contact zones within the central Indo-Pacific (Christmas
Island, Bali, Iriomote) and one central control region (Philippines) and recorded >3000
interactions between species pairs. Here, I present preliminary data from these locations
at the start of a larger project to determine whether competition could be a significant
force in the maintenance of biogeographic boundaries.


`IKE KAI: AN INNOVATIVE AND ENGAGING CURRICULUM FOR THE DIVISION
OF AQUATIC RESOURCES (Abstract ID: 29885)

BIOGEOGRAPHIC COMPARISON OF LOPHELIA-ASSOCIATED BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES IN THE WESTERN ATLANTIC (Abstract ID: 28338)

The State of Hawai’i Makai Watch (MW) Program is a collaborative statewide program
whereby citizens and NGOs systematically assist the Department of Land and Natural
Resources (DLNR) in its mandate to manage marine and coastal resources. A gap was
recently identified that is preventing the MW program from fully achieving its mission
of building capacity for community stewardship - a lack of foundational training for
MW volunteers in marine science and resource management. The goal of the ‘Ike Kai
curriculum project was to fill this gap by increasing MW volunteers’ baseline knowledge

Over the last decade, publications on deep-sea corals have tripled. Most attention
has been paid to Lophelia pertusa, a globally distributed scleractinian coral that creates
the Mediterranean Sea, Norwegian fjords, off Great Britain, and in the Gulf of Mexico

171

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

(GOM). However, use of different methodologies prevents direct comparisons in
most cases. Our objectives were to address intra-regional variation and to describe the
conserved bacterial core community. We collected samples from three distinct colonies
GOM and one off the east coast of the United States. Amplicon libraries of 16S rRNA
genes were generated using V4-V5 primers and 454 pyrosequencing. The dominant
phylum was Proteobacteria (75–96%). At the family level, 80–95% of each sample
was comprised of five groups: Pirellulaceae, Pseudonocardiaceae, Rhodobacteraceae,
Sphingomonadaceae, and unclassified Oceanospirillales. Principal coordinate analysis
based on a weighted unifrac distance showed a clear distinction between the GOM and
Atlantic samples. Interestingly, the replicate samples from each location did not always
cluster together, indicating there is not a strong site-specific influence. A core bacterial
community, conserved in 100% of the samples, was dominated by the alphaproteobacterial genus Novosphingobium.

ETIOLOGICAL AGENTS OR SECONDARY OPPORTUNISTS? FREQUENT MONITORING AIDS IN ASSESSING THE ROLE OF VIBRIO BACTERIA IN DISEASE OF
ACROPORA PALMATA (Abstract ID: 28074 | Poster ID: 156)
Vibrio bacteria are frequently associated with disturbed states of the coral microbiome
due to disease or thermal stress. We examined the seasonal dynamics and association of
Vibrio with disease lesions on the Caribbean coral, Acropora palmata in the Florida Keys,
such as Vibrio, in coral disease because samples are collected after disease signs are
already apparent and lesion age is unknown. Vibrio may be primary etiological agents
of coral disease or part of secondary opportunistic infections. To further investigate the
week during July 2015. Samples from new lesions <24 h old and 3, 6, and 8+ day-old
than 170 Vibrio isolates for phylogenetic analysis. Unique isolates were chosen for further
analyses with the aim to provide new insights into metabolic and virulence capabilities
of coral-associated Vibrio. This study highlights the importance of frequent monitoring
during disease outbreaks to attribute lesion causality.



PHYSICAL MECHANISMS OF ISLAND BUILDING – THE IMPLICATIONS OF
OVERWASH FOR ISLAND MAINTENANCE (Abstract ID: 28506)

BALANCING THE BUDGET: A NEW WAY TO ASSESS HERBIVORE FUNCTION
ON FISHED AND UNFISHED REEFS ACROSS MAUI, HAWAII (Abstract ID: 29951)

The future stability and continued persistence of low-lying coral reef islands has generated global concern in recent decades as sea levels rise and the frequency of storms
increases. Increased shoreline erosion and wave-induced flooding are widely accepted
impacts of such environmental changes. However, such assertions are commonly
based on an assumption that the island shoreline is static. Recent studies have indicated
that islands have the potential to migrate in planform on their reef surfaces, indicating
that islands are dynamic features that can adjust their shape and position in response
to changing boundary conditions. The three-dimensional nature of island dynamics
have not been well quantified. This paper adds to understanding of island responses to
elevated sea level by examining additional physical processes that enable islands to build
vertically. The magnitude and temporal and spatial dimensions of vertical aggradation of
islands are explored and implications for future persistence discussed.

Herbivore grazing pressure on coral reefs is considered a major driver in the maintenance
of coral dominance over algae in competition for space. However few studies have attempted to quantify and compare rates of consumption by herbivores with production of
new biomass by the algal community. Here, we calculate a budget for herbivore consumption and algal growth on Hawaiian coral reefs by multiplying bootstrapped distributions
of field-measured variables. Data were collected at reefs around Maui including Kahekili
Herbivore Fisheries Management Area, a near-shore reef impacted by nutrient pollution
and fishing and established in 2009 to prohibit take of herbivores. At Kahekili, our results
show that despite herbivore protection, algal production currently exceeds the grazing
capacity of the herbivorous fish community by three to four times. While some of this
production is likely consumed by urchins or converted to detritus, increased herbivore
biomass will be required to effectively reduce algal abundance. Despite the gap, larger size
classes of herbivores, particularly of the scraper/excavator feeding guild, are contributing
more to consumption in recent years, which could have additional feedbacks that promote reef-building taxa. Island-wide, we found that net algal biomass production was lowest at reefs with high coral cover even when fish biomass at these reefs was comparable
or less than on low coral cover reefs. The results of this study suggest lower herbivore
biomass is required to maintain a healthy reef than to restore a degraded reef.


REEF-BUILDING CORALS AS A NATURAL MODEL FOR EVOLUTIONARY TRANSITIONS IN SYMBIONT TRANSMISSION MODE (Abstract ID: 28094)
Symbiosis has played a fundamental role in the evolution of life, and in the case of reefbuilding corals, constitutes the foundation of one of the most biodiverse and productive
ecosystems on the planet. However, surprisingly little is known about how inter-species
mutualisms evolve from cooperative partnerships to integrated organisms, though
symbiont transmission mode is predicted to be important. A transition from horizontal
(symbionts sourced from the environment) to vertical (direct transfer from parent to
offspring) transmission aligns the reproductive interests of partners and should optimize
resource sharing to maximize whole organism fitness. We quantified resource sharing
and evaluated changes in fitness between horizontal and vertical transmitters using three
pairs of closely related coral species with different strategies. Two out of three vertical
transmitters exhibited phenotypes consistent with predictions: both Porites lobata and
Montipora aequituburculata exhibited higher growth and enhanced bleaching tolerance
compared to their horizontally transmitting counterparts. Surprisingly, all hosts and symbionts continued to share carbon in spite of thermal stress, suggesting that a breakdown
in host-symbiont cooperation is a consequence rather than a cause of coral bleaching.
We discuss possible explanations for trait variation among vertical transmitters and
argue that future investigations using this framework could provide novel insights into the
coral-algal symbiosis.


EXTREME FUNCTIONAL DIFFERENCES AMOUNG PALAUAN REEF CORALS
AND THEIR SYMBIOTIC ALGAE (Abstract ID: 29651)
The inshore coral reef habitats of Palau resemble temperature and pH conditions similar
eight species of Scleractinia found in both inshore and offshore reefs. Stable isotopes
(δ13C and δ15N) were used to deduce the relative importance of photosynthesis and
heterotrophy to corals living in each habitat. Coral from inshore habitats were found to
associate with Symbiodinium trenchii (type D1a). Isotopic values of the animal’s tissue,
symbiotic algae, and skeleton revealed that these corals relied on zooplankton and particulate organic matter (POM) for metabolism considerably more than conspecifics from
offshore reefs. Offshore corals depended more on autotrophy and harbored different
species of symbiont. As expected, thermal experiments revealed offshore corals were
more negatively impacted by increased temperature. However, comparisons of nutrient
allocation under normal and stressful conditions indicated little, or no, significant tradeoffs in the physiological performance of some stress-tolerant host-symbiont pairings,
contrary to prevailing assumptions. These findings indicate that while inshore corals rely
more on a combination of energy sources to acclimatize to stressful environments, their
symbioses are maintained with minimal cost to animal growth. Our findings show how
coral metabolism may need to shift to cope with increased ocean warming.



REEF CARBONATE BUDGET RESPONSES TO CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE USE
OF CORALLINE ALGAE AS A RESILIENCE INDICATOR FOR OCEAN ACIDIFICATION (Abstract ID: 28963)
Ocean acidification (and warming) are known to negatively influence calcification rates
of marine organisms, with crustose coralline algae (CCA) – which use high-mg calcite to
172

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

build skeletons – believed to be particularly vulnerable to changes in seawater chemistry.
Despite this, little is known about ‘normal’ calcification rates of corallines along the
Great Barrier Reef (GBR), and their relative contribution to reef structural growth.
Our project set out to describe variability in CCA calcification rate, spatially (along the
length and breadth of the GBR) and temporally (between seasons). Determining in situ
calcification rates provided a baseline for future monitoring efforts aimed specifically at
tracking climate change (ocean acidification) impacts on Australian reefs. We augmented
our CCA calcification data by placing it into the wider context of reef structural growth,
developing the first comprehensive set of census-based coral reef carbonate budgets for
CCA and corals) and bioerosion processes, describe the ability of a reef to maintain both
their structural integrity and vertical reef growth capacity. Data on each reef’s carbonate
budget status, as well as providing an assessment of reef health, will be further used to
inform predictive models that will examine the point of reef functional collapse under
future climate scenarios. As CCA play key roles in reef stabilisation and recovery, documenting natural variability in coralline calcification rates in the context of reef carbonate
budgets will support research into environmental thresholds for healthy reef structural
growth.

WHEN DO ADULT REEF FISHES DIE? (Abstract ID: 28956)
Mortality is considered to be critically important in shaping reef fish communities, however, we currently know remarkably little about the nature of mortality in adult coral reef
fishes. Mortality on coral reefs is intrinsically linked with predation, with most evidence
suggesting that key predators are usually on the hunt during dawn and dusk. We tested
this ‘crepuscular predation’ hypothesis using passive acoustic telemetry movement data
to determine the time of day of potential mortality events of adult herbivorous reef
fishes. Furthermore, we identified five types of potential mortality events based on the
nature of change in signal detections from tagged fishes. We found that the majority of
the potential mortality events were characterised by an abrupt stop in detections, possibly as a result of a large, mobile predators such as a carangids or reef sharks. Mortality
in adult herbivorous reef fishes is higher during the day than previously expected. The
time of day of the potential mortality events suggest that predation was highest during
the day and crepuscular periods, and lowest at night, offering only partial support for the
crepuscular predation hypothesis. Visually-oriented, diurnal and crepuscular predators
appear to be more important than their nocturnal counterparts in terms of predation on
adult reef fishes. By revealing the timing of potential mortality events, passive acoustic
telemetry may offer an important new tool for investigating the nature of predation on
coral reefs.



THE ROLE OF TABULAR STRUCTURE IN THE ECOLOGY OF LARGE REEF
FISHES (Abstract ID: 27788)
Although prior studies had hypothesised that declines in the abundance and diversity
of large reef fishes might be seen following the loss of tabular structures, no studies had
experimentally demonstrated this relationship. We therefore examined this outcome by
excluding access of large reef fishes to the understory of tabular structures. The exclusion of large reef fishes from tabular structures using mesh wire had a significant effect
on the distribution of large reef fishes, even though these structures only constituted
a small fraction (4%) of the benthic cover. Reduction in the availability of tabular
structures at this spatial scale (200 m2) shifted activity spaces of fishes away from these
localities. To examine why some species of large reef fishes demonstrate such a strong
attachment to tabular structure, we sought to test two hypotheses to explain sheltering
behaviour: avoidance of predation or avoidance of solar irradiance. Patterns of shelter
use offered minimal evidence in support of the predation avoidance hypothesis, with usage of tabular structures being low during the sunset period when predators of large reef
fishes were likely to be most active. However, tabular structure usage reached a peak
during the middle of the day when incident solar irradiance would reach its zenith. As
such, the data suggest that large reef fishes are primarily sheltering to protect themselves
from harmful UV irradiance. Given the significant costs of producing UV-blocking mycosporine-like amino acids, fishes may achieve considerable energetic savings by sheltering.

LONG-TERM MONITORING OF CORAL HEALTH IN BOCAS DEL TORO,
PANAMA FOLLOWING THE 2005, 2010, AND 2015 MASS BLEACHING EVENTS
(Abstract ID: 28247)
Coral reefs are declining worldwide due to climate change and other local and global
environmental stressors. However, most research on coral reef health does not track
the corals for sufficient time after a disturbance to determine the long-term effects. For
this project, we observed the bleaching response, mortality, and recovery of over 300
tagged coral colonies in Bocas del Toro, Panama by photographing them approximately
annually between 2005 and 2015. There was a Caribbean-wide mass bleaching event in
2005, followed by additional bleaching events in 2010 and 2015. We measured the areas
of bleached, partially bleached, and live and dead tissue on individual tagged corals of
7 dominant Caribbean reef species using image segmentation to calculate growth and
decline rates. We found that there were significant differences between species and that
by 2013, all corals had declined in live area. Moreover, field observations from 2015
and preliminary analyses show that previously resistant species such as Siderastrea sidereawere more affected by the 2015 bleaching event than previously vulnerable species
such as Stephanocoenia michelini and Orbicella franksi. This indicates that coral recovery
is a complex process that is likely dependent on multiple factors; therefore, time series
are important because they allow us to consider recovery on a longer time scale. By
continuing to monitor bleaching and assessing reef health, we can better understand
how coral reefs will respond to a warmer future and try to develop effective management strategies.


MARINE PROTECTED AREA PRIORITY SITES FOR FISHERIES AND BIODIVERSITY OBJECTIVES IN THE CENTRAL SAUDI ARABIAN RED SEA (Abstract ID:
28607)
Spatial prioritization is an important step for making sound decisions regarding sustainable management of marine resources. Ideally, such management should protect biodiversity while also achieving sustainable fisheries objectives, but these two contrasting
objectives are rarely combined in systematic conservation planning. Here, we prioritize
reefs for inclusion in local marine protected area (MPA) networks near Thuwal in the
central Saudi Arabian Red Sea, aiming to achieve either fisheries or biodiversity objectives. We then compare the outputs of these spatial prioritization exercises. Within each
type of objective, minimum and maximum recommended levels of protection (up to
10 and 30% of available resources, respectively) were considered, leading to a total of
four scenarios. The scenarios for fisheries objectives integrated spatial patterns of the
abundances of 11 commercially targeted fish species, while those for biodiversity integrated 7 fish species and 5 benthic categories that are endemic and/or representative of
different local reef communities. Results showed considerable spatial overlap between
MPAs produced for fisheries and those produced for biodiversity objectives; however,
MPAs for fisheries were generally larger, and thus, likely to be more expensive. Overall,
results suggest that implementing a local MPA network that can achieve both fisheries
and biodiversity objectives simultaneously may be possible in the presence of adequate
species information.

gov

SISTER SANCTUARIES LINK CORAL REEF SCIENCE AND STEWARDSHIP IN
28181)
programs at Guanahacabibes National Park’s Banco de San Antonio and Flower Garden
Banks National Marine Sanctuary are being designed. Flower Garden Banks National
173

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

the resultant comprehensive dataset reveals spatial heterogeneity in trait combinations,
and the correlation between biodiversity indicators (species richness and phylogenetic
diversity metrics) and functional diversity indices (functional richness, evenness, and
divergence).

Marine Sanctuary has comparable physical and biological features to the coral reefs at
Banco de San Antonio. The sister sanctuary designation allows direct evaluation of the
and Cuba to share their technical expertise in characterizing the physical and biological
features within the sister sites, understanding the migratory and reproductive connections of species between the sites, investigating the mechanisms that spread invasive
species, pathogens and pollution in the region, and evaluating how human activities are
impacting marine resources in both countries. These and other programs developed in
this sister sanctuary relationship are establishing unprecedented cooperation between



TERRESTRIAL POLLUTION VERSUS GLOBAL WARMING: WHAT DRIVES
CORAL ANNUAL EXTENSION IN THE ANTHROPOCENE ERA? - A CASE STUDY
IN CHUUK LAGOON, MICRONESIA - (Abstract ID: 29228 | Poster ID: 442)

CORAL HEALTH & DISEASE IN URBAN VERSUS RURAL AREAS OF TIMORLESTE (Abstract ID: 29046 | Poster ID: 157)

Terrestrial pollution and CO2-driven global warming are main threats to coral reefs
