regulatory framework is presented for validation by the local community in order to
enhance stakeholder compliance. The use of the MPA Effectiveness Assessment Tool
(MEAT) and key informant interviews provided insights on MPA management effectiveness, socio-economic benefits and other related information for compliance. MPAs in
Calatagan had a higher level (3 and 4) of effectiveness compared to Tingloy (level 0);
yet compliance between the two MPAs did not vary substantially as both municipalities displayed a similar percentage of violators (<10% of the population fished inside
the sanctuaries). However, reduction of other illegal fishing activities was still observed
since the establishment of MPAs. Continuous and collective efforts in capacity building,
planning, policy, conservation and management strategies among the stakeholders and
coastal populations should be addressed to maximize conservation and socio-economic
benefits derived from MPAs.



HIGHER LEVEL SYSTEMATICS OF THE WALKING, SWIMMING, AND BURROWING HOLOTHUROIDEA (ECHINODERMATA): A SIX-GENE MOLECULAR
PHYLOGENETIC APPROACH (Abstract ID: 28518)

EVALUATION OF THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC BENEFITS AND ROLE OF STAKEHOLDERS IN STRENGTHENING THE MARINE PROTECTED AREA NETWORKS
OF SELECTED SITES IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29328)

Sea cucumbers (Holothuroidea) are some of the most morphologically diverse, ecologically important, and economically valued echinoderms; however, the higher-level
systematics of the class remains controversial. Here, we present a phylogeny of the
extant Holothuroidea estimated with maximum parsimony, maximum-likelihood, and
Bayesian approaches using approximately 5.1 kb of mt- (COI, 16s, 12s) and nDNA (H3,
18s, 28s) sequences from 80 holothuroid terminals representing 23 of the 27 families. We
found that three of five orders are non-monophyletic. Apodida is sister to the rest of Holothuroidea. Apodida and Elasipodida lack respiratory trees and lie paraphyletic below a
clade with respiratory trees. Elasipodida is polyphyletic. Aspidochirotida is paraphyletic
with representatives from three orders (Molpadida, Dendrochirotida, and Elasipodida in
part) nested within it. Dactylochirotida is at least in part of derived dendrochirotes. Molpadida’s position is least certain; it unstably groups with Dendrochirotida or two other
mixed clades that are dominated by members of Aspidochirotida. These results indicate
that there has been rampant homoplasy in the anatomical features used as traditional
taxonomic characters, necessitating a major systematic revision of Holothuroidea and a
new perspective on the evolution of the class.

Various studies on marine protected area networks have focused on its managerial
and biophysical aspect. However, the segmentation of stakeholders and the local
communities and the understanding and application of information on the value of the
socioeconomic features is crucial in enhancing their performance. This study aims to
assess the pivotal functions of each stakeholder groups within the Batangas, Oriental
Mindoro and Lanuza Bay Networks. Determination of the relative contribution of their
socioeconomic benefits was used to analyze the stakeholders’ performance and classify
tasks, responsibilities, capacity potentials and limitations of accountable members. The
socioeconomic assessment tool and network effectiveness assessment tool accompanied by secondary data collection were used to examine the socioeconomic and general
network diffusion of information of the three sites. Local government units possessed
the most crucial role in the network acting as direct influence to civil society. The
socioeconomic evaluation suggested that the output indicators were associated with
the input indicators such as budget and revenue allocation. Moreover, stronger network
yields better performances on the identified network management criteria. This indicates
that the communication and feedback of socioeconomic benefits with clear stakeholders’ functions generally strengthen the marine protected area network. The vitality of
network connectivity studies at the municipal-scale scenario highlights the bottom-up
approach in contributing to the goals for sustainable development.



SEAGRASS AMELIORATES CORAL PHYSIOLOGICAL PERFORMANCE UNDER
OA CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 29520 | Poster ID: 374)
Coral reefs are the most biologically diverse and economically important ecosystem
on the planet; however they are sensitive to impacts from human activities like ocean
acidification. Ocean acidification lowers the saturation state of calcium carbonate utilized by calcifying organisms, potentially leading to dissolution of skeletons and reduced
ability to form new calcium carbonate structures, as well as impacting general health and
physiology. Seagrass meadows, sometimes found adjacent to coral reefs in the Florida
Keys, are mostly net autotrophic as a carbon sink and use the excess bicarbonate for
growth. This presents the possibility of locally mediating ocean acidification effects on
corals downstream of seagrass meadows. This study tested the impacts of the presence
of seagrass (Halodule wrightii andSyringodium filiforme) on carbonate chemistry and coral
health (Acropora cervicornis, Porites porites, and Porites astreoides) in ocean acidification
228

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

larval survivorship and settlement/competency curves were determined over their full
pelagic duration. For both species, known parental genets that spawn on the same night
show dramatic variation in pairwise fertilization assays at high sperm concentration.
This implies substantially lower larval production than would be presumed from simple
spawning output at a given parental density. Larval survivorship and competency curves
were substantially different between species. Peak settlement response (in the presence
Although additional data is needed from other areas/populations, contrasting early life
history characteristics suggest strong differences in potential connectivity between these
imperiled keystone species and need to be considered in management and recovery
planning.

scenarios expected to occur in this century and present day conditions in land-based experimental settings. Physiological and functional responses measured include chlorophyll
a, total protein, zooxanthellae counts, photosynthesis, respiration, and net calcification.
Physiological responses were variable among species; however, coral respiration was
consistently higher in the presence of seagrass. Results presented here describe the

MANIPULATION OF THE ASSOCIATED MICROBIAL COMMUNITY BY THE
CORAL HOST IN THE ACROPORA MILLEPORA HOLOBIONT (Abstract ID: 27917)


Corals live in close association with complex and diverse bacterial communities, but
little is known about the roles of the bacteria in the diseased and healthy states of corals.
Some bacteria are thought to play important roles in coral nutrition and shifts in the
abundance of specific bacteria that are normal associates of corals may underlie some
coral diseases. Many organisms manipulate their associated bacterial communities by
producing anti-microbial peptides (AMPs), and this is also the case in corals. We have
identified a novel family of AMPs in anthozoan cnidarians and shown that the Acropora
protein is highly active, particularly against gram-positive bacteria. The Acropora AMP
is expressed in larvae and all later developmental stages. As gram-negative bacteria
dominate the microbial communities associated with “healthy” corals, the novel AMP
presumably functions in limiting the growth of gram-positive bacteria. Immune challenge
experiments imply that corals are also capable of interfering with bacterial communication systems, potentially providing another means by which control can be imposed on
the resident bacterial communities.

SHOULD I STAY OR SHOULD I GO? PHENOTYPIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL
DETERMINANTS OF LARVAL DISPERSAL (Abstract ID: 28464)
Environmental changes have caused the destabilization of many of the world’s ecosystems. In order to cope with environmental change, organisms may adapt by selection or adjust their phenotypes. Organisms may alter the dispersive potential of their
offspring to track the movement of favorable environments in space and time. Different
dispersal strategies are widespread in animals and plants, enabling species to respond
to environmental change. However, despite extreme temporal and spatial variability
in coral reef environments, phenotypic plasticity associated with dispersal is virtually
unknown among coral reef organisms. We will present the latest findings of our project,
ANR funded research co-written with Glenn on his arrival at CRIOBE in Perpignan,
which uses clownfish as a model species to unravel the causal mechanisms underlying
dispersal. We will present the effects of anthropogenic and environmental stressors on
parental behaviour and stress hormone levels, and their impacts on spawning frequency,
fecundity and larval traits associated with dispersal.



A 25-YEAR MONITORING PROGRAM REVEALS SIGNIFICANT DECREASES IN
CORAL BUT INCREASES IN REEF FISH ABUNDANCE AND BIOMASS ON REEFS
Analysis from a 25-year annual fish and benthic monitoring program at 4 sites in St. John,
US Virgin Islands (3 sites in Virgin Islands National Park), revealed that despite significant declines in coral cover (>60%, p<0.05) primarily from hurricanes, coral bleaching
and disease, reef fish abundance and biomass have increased significantly. Permanent
benthic transects sampled from 1989 to 2014 revealed significant declines in coral cover,
but increases in gorgonian and crustose coralline algae. Macroalgal cover varied over this
period. Total reef fish biomass increased across all sites pooled (p<0.05), although no
significant trends were observed in species richness or abundance. Herbivore increases
were primarily driven by parrotfishes (Scaridae) the family with the highest biomass and
second highest abundance, for both metrics increased at all sites pooled and individually
(p<0.05). Secondary consumers increased in abundance and biomass at three sites
(p<0.05), and biomass increase at all sites pooled was driven by increases of snappers
(Lutjanidae) and grunts (Haemulidae). Large predators (primarily piscivores) showed
no change in abundance at all sites pooled, but increased at one site in abundance and
biomass. Grouper (Serranidae) and jack (Carangidae) biomass increased at all sites
pooled and individually (except groupers at one site). The use of standardized monitoring co-located at permanent reef locations over multiple decades provides managers in
Virgin Islands National Park and the Caribbean with long term trends in these valuable
reef resources.

REEF FLAT RECOVERY FOLLOWING LARGE-SCALE REMOVAL OF INVASIVE
ALGAE (Abstract ID: 29060 | Poster ID: 475)
The invasive alien alga (IAA) Avrainvillea amadelpha has fundamentally altered the shallow reef flats of Maunalua Bay, Hawaii, transforming a diverse, productive mosaic of
native algal and seagrass communities into a sediment-laden monoculture of alien algae.
Between March 2010 and May 2011 the local community and The Nature Conservancy,
along with government, academic, and conservation partners, removed 10.9 ha and
from 57.9(2.7)% [mean (SEM)] to 5.9 (2.4)%. Silt entrained in the IAA initially remained
trapped within the project area, but eventually flushed from the bay following a series
of high wave events. For approximately 20 months post-clearance, recovery was on the
desired trajectory toward a native-species dominated reef flat community. At 24-months,
a source of fine sediment. In response, the community targeted volunteer clearing efforts
across the project remains spatially patchy but low (15.5 (1.0)%), while native algae cover
be a viable restoration option for reef flat communities in Hawaii.



IMPROVING ESTIMATES OF LARVAL PRODUCTION, SURVIVORSHIP, AND
COMPETENCY IN TWO IMPERILIED CARIBBEAN BROADCASTERS (Abstract ID:
27893)

NEARSHORE CURRENTS AND POPULATION CONNECTIVITY AROUND OKINAWAN FRINGING REEFS — A DRIFTER STUDY (Abstract ID: 28263)

palmata and Orbicella faveolata, from the Florida Keys. Pairwise fertilization rates and

Ocean circulation processes are one of the major factors that determine connectivity,
recruitment, and isolation of populations of reef organisms. It has been demonstrated
that ocean models can account for (or match) genetic patterns among populations

229

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

es (SOD) are antioxidant enzymes which protects the cell from oxidative stress. Several
forms of SOD, harboring different metal co-factors: Cu/Zn, Mn and Fe, are present in
animal and vegetal cells including corals and their zooxanthellae. An increase of the
amount of SOD enzymes in coral tissue under thermal stress in the field and an increase
of total SOD activity in corals experimentally stressed by high water temperature, have
been reported. However, literature on natural variations of the different SODs activities
in coral is still scarce. The activity of the different SOD for the coral Montipora digitate
was monitored for more than a year under natural conditions at the Sesoko Island, Okinawa, Japan. Cu/Zn-SOD and, Mn and/or Fe-SOD activities were assayed by the nitrite
method in the host tissue and zooxanthellae. Most of the SOD activities of the coral host
and the zooxanthellae showed seasonal variations with increased activities in summer
and decreased in winter. During summer, Cu/Zn represented the major contribution to
In addition, it shows that the different SODs have different responses against stressors
such as high and low temperature.

inhabiting distant reefs. However, it is not clear whether ocean models can account for
year-to-year connectivity at local reef scales, which is essential for optimal management
of reef ecosystems. Many regional ocean models have not fully integrated important
interactions). We deployed 182 GPS-equipped surface-drifting buoys (Pacific Gyre, Microstar drifters) near reef crests (typically ~100 m offshore) of fringing reefs in Okinawa
Prefecture. Drifter dispersal trajectories were compared with known recruitment patterns
ofacroporid corals and predatory crown-of-thorns starfish, Acanthaster planci, along the
Onna village coast of Okinawa Island, as well as dispersal probabilities predicted based
upon high-resolution (200 m) regional ocean circulation models. Drifting buoys were
typically released monthly or bi-monthly in Spring, Summer, and Fall of 2011–2015 from
5 islands (Okinawa, Zamami, Kume, Ishigaki, and Daito). Larger drifter releases were
conducted on coral spawning days. Our study suggests that proper inclusion of nearshore circulation processes is important to accurately estimate year-to-year connectivity
of corals and populations inhabiting fringing reefs.


30059 | Poster ID: 455)

DECIPHERING CELL CYCLE REGULATION IN ZOOXANTHELLAE (Abstract ID:
27794 | Poster ID: 113)

Conservation of biodiversity is an important issue, especially in coral reef ecosystems.
On Okinawa Island, Japan, the coastal area has continuously been exposed to artificial
disturbances such as landfill, seawall construction, soil run-off, and water pollution. However, how local marine organism communities respond to such long-term disturbances
and what factors determine local community structure are hard to assess due to a lack
1974. Fourteen sites (=15%) disappeared between 1974 and 2015 due to construction of
seawalls, fishery ports, or landfill. For environmental data set, we obtained data on soil
run-off, nutrients, and river pollution from Okinawa Prefectural Institute of Health and
Environment, geological features from the Geological Survey of Japan, and calculated
shore direction and openness to the ocean from Google Earth, along with other values
such as distance from shoreline, type of substrate, etc. We then analyzed the influence
of geological and physiological environmental factors on mollusk community structure
using principal component analyses. Although we are unable to directly compare 2015
data to 1974 data due to differences in survey efforts, comparative analyses will provide
us important information in understanding changes in the environment and biodiversity
over the last 40 years.

A critical relationship exists between reef-building corals and symbiotic zooxanthellae
residing within them. These photosynthetic algae (Symbiodinium spp.) harvest energy from
sunlight and share it with their coral hosts. In return, corals provide them with metabolites,
a stable position in the water column, and protection from grazing. This relationship,
which is critically important for reef health, is delicate. Exposure to temperatures only
marginally above the average maximum can cause corals to expel their residents. To
establish symbiosis, corals produce a signal that forcesSymbiodinium into a non-motile, dividing state. Other signals then coordinate coral-algal cell divisions to maintain the proper
density of symbionts. Evidence suggests that failure of the host to maintain proper control
of zooxanthellae cell divisions at high temperatures may cause bleaching. Unfortunately,
little is known regarding cell cycle regulation inSymbiodinium, so this host-mediated control is poorly understood. Using computational methods, we identified putative cell cycle
genes in the recently published genome of Symbiodinium minutum. We then correlated
expression of these genes with cell cycle phase in cultured Symbiodinium. With these data,
we will begin deciphering zooxanthelale cell cycle regulation to understand how corals
and algae coordinate life cycles to maintain a proper balance for symbiosis.


CARBONATE CHEMISTRY OF REEFS ALTERED BY MACROALGAE: A SNAPSHOT STUDY OF HOW INVASIVE ALGAE CHANGE THEIR PH ENVIRONMENT
(Abstract ID: 29911 | Poster ID: 85)

JUVENILE CORALS ARE AFFECTED BY LOW SEDIMENTATION RATES: THE
FIRST WEEKS ARE CRUCIAL (Abstract ID: 28758 | Poster ID: 430)

Non-native macroalgal species have been introduced to Hawaii since the 1950’s, and
have spread throughout the reefs of the Main Hawaiian Islands. It has been suggested
that marine alga are not only resource competitors to reef-building corals, but can
also change their local pH environment through photosynthesis and respiration. The
resilience of corals is continuously being challenged by climate change, and understanding how coral reefs respond to their changing environment must include looking at how
other reef organisms influence their local environments. This study investigated whether
invasive algae inhabiting the surfaces of coral reefs could alter the carbonate chemistry
environment surrounding reef-building corals. Water samples for pH and total alkalinity
(TA) were collected from immediately below algal mats and from the water column on
a patch reef in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii. No relationship was found between percent algal
coverage and TA, however, there was a positive correlation between pH and percent
algal coverage. These data indicates that macroalgae mats covering coral reefs could be
creating distinct pH environments, dissimilar to the surrounding coral reef habitat.

Increased sedimentation due to anthropogenic activities is a threat to many near-shore
coral reefs. The effects on adult corals have been studied extensively and are rather
well-known. Studies about the impact of sedimentation on the early life stages of
scleractinian corals, however, are rare although recruitment is essential for conserving
and restoring resilient coral reefs. Laboratory and in-situ experiments with recruits of different age classes focused on the broadcast-spawning species Acropora hyacinthus, and
the brooding coral Leptastrea purpurea. Recruits were exposed to different sediment
loads over a time-span of three to five weeks. Applied sediment loads were more than
one order of magnitude lower than those known to affect survival of adult coral colonies. The results show that growth and survival of newly settled recruits were negatively
affected by sediment loads which had no effect on the growth and survival of one-month
old recruits. All experiments indicate that newly settled coral recruits are most sensitive
to sedimentation within the first two to four weeks after settlement. The co-occurrence
of moderate sedimentation events during and immediately after periods of coral spawning can therefore reduce recruitment success. These findings provide new information to
develop comprehensive sediment management plans for the conservation and recovery
of coral reefs affected by chronic or acute sedimentation stress.


SEASONAL VARIATION OF THE ANTIOXIDANT ENZYME ACTIVITY IN THE
HERMATYPIC CORALS (Abstract ID: 29214 | Poster ID: 125)

gov

Recently an increased frequency of coral bleaching events have been reported in coral
reefs around the world. Coral bleaching is caused by stresses such as high temperature,
which lead to an increased production of reactive oxygen species. Superoxide dismutas-

230

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



MOLECULAR MECHANISMS UNDERLYING ESTABLISHMENT OF CORAL-SYMBIODINIUM SYMBIOSIS: A TRANSCRIPTOMIC APPROACH (Abstract ID: 27923)
Despite the ecological significance of coral-Symbiodinium symbiosis, very little is known
about the molecular mechanisms involved in the establishment of the relationship. Gene
expression studies based on microarrays have led to the assumption that host transcriptome is largely unresponsive during the establishment of symbiosis with competent Symbiodinium. In the present study, Illumina RNA-Seq was used to investigate transcriptome
changes in Acropora digitifera larvae during exposure to competent Symbiodinium (a
clade B strain). A transient period of differential expression involving a small number
of genes (1073 transcripts; <3% of the transcriptome) was detected very early in the
detected as a consequence of both the lower sensitivity of the microarray approaches
used and the sampling times used. The transcriptome data imply that translation and
oxidative metabolism are supressed in the coral host during the infection process, and
altered expression of some apoptosis-related genes was also observed. The results also
suggest the involvement of both partners in the establishment of the symbiosis; there is
an active response on the part of the host in recognizing the symbiotic partner, but an
apparent suppression of host immune responses may be initiated by the symbiont. The
results are also consistent with the hypothesis that the symbiosome is a phagosome that
has undergone early arrest, raising the possibility of a common mechanism of symbiont
infection in corals and symbiotic sea anemones.

ECOSYSTEM APPROACH TO FISHERIES MANAGEMENT FOR LEADERS, EXECUTIVES AND DECISION-MAKERS (LEAD) (Abstract ID: 29074 | Poster ID: 574)
Given the global need for more holistic and balanced fisheries management through an
Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM) and requests from fisheries
managers across Southeast Asia to gain support of leadership to implement an EAFM,
a consortium of international fisheries management organizations joined forces to
develop the “EAFM for Leaders, Executives and Decision-makers (LEAD)” toolkit. The
EAFM LEAD toolkit provides leaders in fisheries and other sectors and throughout
levels of government with an improved understanding of, and ability to initiate EAFM,
and more broadly ecosystem-based fisheries management (EBFM). The LEAD toolkit
was designed to help facilitators educate and engage leaders in an EAFM/EBFM so that
situation-based tools, the toolkit helps leaders: 1) understand why EAFM leads to more
sustainable fisheries management and can improve the well-being of their people; 2) understand what an EAFM is; 3) recognize and discuss human, ecological, and governance
issues and concerns relating to their fisheries and how an EAFM can help; 4) understand
in general how the EAFM Planning Process works; 5) recognize that they have the legal
and institutional ability to engage in an EAFM; 6) communicate EAFM across sectors



HOME RANGE, ACTIVITY PATTERNS AND INDIVIDUAL HABITAT TRANSITIONS OF DUSKY PARROTFISH SCARUS NIGER ON INTACT AND TYPHOONIMPACTED CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 29359 | Poster ID: 516)
Parrotfishes mediate competition between corals and macroalgae, and their role in algal
removal will be influenced by changes in movement patterns on reefs in different states.
Acoustic telemetry was used to understand movement of Dusky parrotfish Scarus niger
at Apo Island, Philippines. We established an array of acoustic receivers on the southeastern side of Apo where coral cover was very low (5%) due to severe damage caused
by two typhoons (in 2011 and 2012). Another array of receivers was established on the
captured, tagged and released on each side of the island. Data was available from 17 out
side of the island, and vice versa. Most fish remained on their respective side of the
island and displayed activity spaces that were usually smaller than receiver arrays (400
m wide). Depth data was used to examine individual activity by calculating daily metrics
for vertical migration, mean depth and standard deviation of depth. Activity patterns
were similar in both habitats, with larger mean depth in intact habitat, and more vertical
activity in larger fish. Daily movements of parrotfish observed over the long term ranged
from a few 10s to several 100s of m. The longer-range movements indicate that some
individuals may be able to adjust their home range and activity patterns in response to
large-scale changes in the benthos that may influence grazing patterns.

STATUS OF CORAL REEFS IN SRI LANKA: A MICROBIAL PERSPECTIVE (Abstract
ID: 27946 | Poster ID: 148)
Coral reefs have suffered from a range of impacts from local anthropogenic influence
to global climate change. These changes adversely affected to switch coral dominated
reefs systems to algae dominated systems. However the mechanisms related to these
global changes in coral reefs is not well understood to date. We hypothesis that microbial
activity in reef waters could be a possible lower scale indication to explain mechanisms related to global change in coral reefs. Reef benthic monitoring, water chemistry
(Dissolved Organic Carbon - DOC) and higher Dissolved Inorganic Nitrogen - DIN)
and abundance of microorganisms (Bacteria and Virus) performed 08 coral reef sites
around Sri Lanka from February 2014 to April 2015. Results show that the coral reefs
in north are dominated by living corals whereas reefs in south dominated by algae.
Algal dominant reefs represented by higher microbial abundances with relation to lower
to changes of reef systems with the microbial activity. Further analyses are in progress to
explain how microbes structuring reef in Sri Lanka



BIOGEOGRAPHIC ASSESSMENTS: A FRAMEWORK FOR INFORMATION SYNTHESIS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID:
29589)
This paper presents NOAA’s Biogeographic Assessment Framework (BAF), a decision support process for ecological forecasting and environmental management with
emphasis on the spatial management of resources in coral reef ecosystems. Spatial
planning is a considerable challenge for marine stewardship agencies because of the
need to synthesize and model information on complex socio-ecological patterns across
geographically broad spatial scales. The BAF provides a multi-disciplinary approach to
integrate geospatial information into formats and visualization tools readily useable for
marine resource management. The BAF is comprised of four components: (1) Planning;
(2) Data Evaluation; (3) Ecosystem Characterization; and (4) Management Applications.
Regardless of the approach taken to fill data gaps, errors in the source data or errors accumulated during processing can proliferate during data synthesis that generate complex
spatial patterns of uncertainty. To aid managers in understanding data reliability, BAF
231

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


quantifies and documents errors and uncertainties throughout project development.
Three major sources of uncertainty in the BAF are: (1) measurement or observation
error, (2) errors arising from assumptions and approximations made in the statistical
modeling process, and (3) inherent variability in ecological processes. Through applied
case studies this paper presents the structure of the BAF framework and the associated
analytical techniques applied to management information needs.

THE EXPOSURE OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION
(Abstract ID: 29104)
The Great Barrier Reef is founded on reef-building corals. Corals build their exoskeleton
with aragonite, but ocean acidification is lowering the aragonite saturation state of
seawater (Ωa). The downscaling of ocean acidification projections from global to GBR
scales requires the set of regional drivers controlling Ωa to be resolved. Here, we use a
regional coupled circulation–biogeochemical model and observations4, to estimate the
Ωa experienced by the 3,581 reefs of the GBR, and to apportion the contributions of the
hydrological cycle, regional hydrodynamics and metabolism on Ωa variability. We find
more detail, and a greater range (1.43), than previously-compiled coarse maps of Ωa of
the region (0.4), or in observations (1.0). Most of the variability in Ωa is due to processes
upstream of the reef in question. As a result, future decline in Ωa is likely to be steeper
on the GBR than currently projected by the IPCC assessment report.


STUDIES ON EFFECT OF CLIMATIC CHANGES ON SCLERACTINIAN CORALS
THROUGH LONG TERM PERMANENT MONITORING PLOTS IN ANDAMAN
AND NICOBAR ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 27961)
A total of 579 species of scleractinian corals under 94 genera and 19 families with 127
threatened species under IUCN were recorded from extensive 1962 km. coastline and
adjoining continental shelf region of Andaman and Nicobar Islands against the India’s
data base of 611 species belong to 98 genera and 19 families. To assess the status of
corals in A&N Islands, 10 Long Term Permanent Monitoring Plots (LTPMPs) have
been established with an area of 100 sq. m. per plot since 2009. The data on inter- and
intra-species cohesion and the adaptive features for the acquisition of development in
association with ecological parameters and associated faunal communities are being
collected in a regular interval. A total of 254 species of scleractinian corals under 50
genera and 12 families were recorded from 10 LTPMPs areas. The mean live coral cover
was 57.65±5.99% with mean density of 22.98±2.65 colony/10 sq. m. was recorded
during 2009. Due to rise of abrupt Sea Surface Temperature (SST) about 3.7°C against
the normal average temperature, massive bleaching was recorded throughout Andaman
Sea during April-May 2010 and resulted with 86.94±6.27% of bleaching exclusively in
the LTPMPs. The resilience of scleractinian corals against bleaching was recorded during 2011 due to conducive environment and it recovered to the extent of 21.40±13.87%
followed by recruitment of new colonies or coralla of scleractinian corals with the mean
of 18.6±8.85%. LTPMPs of South Andaman region faced maximum stresses during the
climatic alteration followed by Middle and North Andaman region and Nicobar group.


GENETIC DIFFERENTIATION OF THE CORALS STYLOPHORA PISTILLATA AND
POCILLOPORA VERRUCOSA ACROSS MULTIPLE SPATIAL SCALES IN THE RED
SEA (Abstract ID: 29272)
Observing populations at different spatial scales gives greater insight into the specific
processes driving genetic differentiation and population structure. Here we assessed
connectivity across multiple spatial scales in the Red Sea to determine the population
structures of two reef building corals Stylophora pistillata and Pocillopora verrucosa. The
Red sea is a 2,250 km long body of water with extremely variable latitudinal environmental gradients, where genetic isolation by environment and distance has previously been
found in other organisms. Mitochondrial and microsatellite markers were used to determine lineages and to look for genetic differentiation among sampling sites. No distinctive
three distinct genetic populations on both a fine and a large scale. Fst, Gst, and Dest were
all significant (p-value<0.05) and showed moderate genetic differentiation between all
sampling sites. However, this seems to be a byproduct of the heterogeneous distribution,
as no distinct genetic population breaks were found at the large scale. Greater population
fine scale environmental variations. However, further environmental and oceanographic
data is needed to make more inferences on this structure at small spatial scales.


INTEGRATING TRADITIONAL CUSTOMARY LAW, KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICE WITH CONSERVATION IN THE BIRDSHEAD SEASCAPE, THE HEART OF
THE CORAL TRIANGLE, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 30001)
As the world’s largest archipelagic nation and custodian of 18 percent of the world’s
coral reef area, Indonesia has made huge strides in creating a national system of nearly
37 million acres of marine protected areas during the past two decades. But enforcement in these reserves is not always effective, and illegal fishing continues. To address
this problem in the Raja Ampat Archipelago in the West Papua province of Indonesia,
teams of citizens actively patrol the area, working to decrease illegal fishing. However,
the legal basis for enforcement by communities is unclear: many of these communities
follow a system of “adat” law, the set of largely unwritten, cultural customs and practices
dating to the 15th century that have under-pinned management of marine resources.
These customs and laws have not previously been consistent and integrated with national level legislation. Two key approaches are being used to address these challenges: i.
documenting the customary laws and then developing a policy framework for their legal
application and enforcement by communities; ii. building a targeted team and road map
for stakeholder engagement in the formal codification and strengthening of adat law on
marine resource management. We are already seeing strong support and commitment
at the grass-roots and regional government levels, with presumed benefits for marine
resources and ecosystems.


THE ROLE OF THE SCLERACTINIAN-ASSOCIATED HYDROZOANS IN THE
CORAL COLONY HEALTH STATE (Abstract ID: 28343)
Scleractinian reef corals have been acknowledged as the most numerous host group for
associated hydrozoans belonging to the genus Zanclea. However, the benefits and costs
of this symbiosis are still not clear. Although trophic and/or protection mutualism seems
a plausible explanation of the association, a possible relationship between the occurrence of hydrozoans and coral diseases has also been proposed. The objective of this
study is to test if Zanclea hydrozoans significantly influence the health of the reef-building
corals. To do that, we test the relationship between the occurrence of Zanclea hydrozoans on corals in relation to different colony conditions: healthy, stressed (bleaching, algae
overgrowth, fishes and gastropods feeding scars), and diseased (WS, SEB, BrB, BBD).
Our preliminary field surveys revealed as the association is widespread in the coral
communities of Maldives and Red Sea. A total of 29 scleractinian genera were found
in association with Zanclea hydrozoans. The overall Zanclea-scleractinians prevalence
resulted very low in the coral reefs, but significant differences were observed between
scleractinian genera and coral communities. Furthermore, no positive implications were
found for both diseased and stressed corals, although a positive effect against predation
(fish bites) was observed for scleractinians hosting Zanclea. In conclusion, the potential
implications of the hydrozoan–scleractinian symbiosis for coral health, its wide distribution, and the number of species it involves indicate urgent need for further investigations.


232

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


restoration projects with long time scales to assist the recovery of damaged reefs. We
propose large-scale coral reef restoration as a cost-effective tool to include in the MPA
manager’s toolbox.

THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
TOOLS AS A MECHANISM TO ENCOURAGE IMPACT AVOIDANCE AND MINIMIZATION TO CORAL REEF RESOURCES (Abstract ID: 29284)


Planned water development projects can provide vital infrastructure to the public.
However, these projects can have significant impacts to coral reef resources. Under
Compensatory Mitigation for the Losses of Aquatic Resources as well as the mitigation
to resources is required prior to compensatory mitigation for the permanent loss of
resources. Prior to finalizing the project design, information such as the type, abundance,
and distribution of resources within and nearby a proposed project can be valuable in
determining project alternatives. The development of acceptable project alternatives
provides maximum avoidance and minimization benefits. Obtaining this information in a
rapid and spatially explicit manner can be a cost effective method that can help provide
balance between development and resource protection. Historically, tools to provide this
basic information within a specific project area have been lacking, limited in utility, and/
or expensive. Here, I describe a process and suite of tools that produce standard map
products with data on all major groups of coral reef organisms and their relative abundance. The process includes using standard field protocols, terminology, data entry with
quality control, data processing, and final map production. This standardized process
produces maps in a rapid and cost effective manner that is comparable across projects
and geographic regions.

EXTREME 2011 LA NIÑA EVENT DRIVES CORAL RANGE EXPANSION ALONG
THE WEST AUSTRALIAN COAST (Abstract ID: 28294 | Poster ID: 308)
The concept of range shifting offers a ray of hope for the future of coral reefs that are
under increasing threat from climate change. The likelihood of coral range expansion
depends upon the availability of source larvae, the presence of suitable, non-degraded
habitat and the incidence of favourable ocean currents to transport larvae. For many
marine species including corals, pole-ward range expansions have been documented and
here we report a new example of climate-driven range expansion along the West Australian (WA) coast. In January 2015, during an island wide survey of coral diversity, a small
at the western tip of Rottnest Island (32˚S). Based on WA and Queensland Museum
Houtman Abrolhos (~28˚S), almost 450 km north of Rottnest Island. We estimate the
colony (10 cm by 15 cm) to be approximately ~4 years old, based on a temperate water
growth rate estimate of <5 cm/year. The coral age suggests settlement occurred during
the 2011 unprecedented La Niña event when sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies
up to 5˚C above average were recorded along the WA coast and contributed to strengthening the Leeuwin Current. This unusual climatic event coincided with the annual spring
coral spawning along the WA coast enabling larvae transportation further south than
usual. Although recruitment success appears to have been extremely low, further range
expansions may be expected in future extreme La Niña years.


A NETWORK APPROACH TO IDENTIFY SUCCESS AND GAPS IN CORAL DISEASE SCIENCE OVER FIVE DECADES OF RESEARCH (Abstract ID: 28165 | Poster
ID: 154)


Here we used a network approach to determine the achievements and gaps of coral
disease research. For this, two networks were built based on the answer to 5 questions
in peer-reviewed coral disease papers published from 1965 to 2015: Which coral genera
are being studied? Where was the sampling performed? Does it include temporal or
seasonal patterns? What was the aim of the study? Where the institutions involved were
to disease prevalence studies, whereas other fields such as pathology, microbiology and
immunology have received attention for few diseases in a limited number of coral genera
and sites. The results indicated that the top 5 locations receiving more attention were
Australia, USA (Florida Keys), Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Israel. Concomitantly, the leader
institutions are based at USA (continental territory), Australia, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and
Israel. Also, the analysis showed a 17% of reciprocity between study sites and the institutions participating in the research, and a negative correlation in the association of the
and vice versa. Furthermore, the network shows that 77% of sites did not include local
institutions in half of the papers published. We conclude coral disease science must
focus to fill out existing gaps, increase efforts in poorly understood syndromes and to
improve the integration of ecological, epidemiological and molecular studies.

SPATIAL PATTERNS IN FISHERIES, POPULATION STRUCTURE AND DEMOGRAPHY OF A HEAVILY EXPLOITED CORAL REEF FISH IN THE TROPICAL PACIFIC
(Abstract ID: 29821)
Coral reef fish provide a significant source of food and economy of Pacific Island
peoples, yet relatively little is known on their life history in the region. Here, spatial
patterns in fisheries, connectivity and demography of a heavily exploited lutjanid,
Lutjanus gibbus, are explored across multiple locations in the tropical Pacific. Creel
surveys highlighted the species’ importance to artisanal and subsistence fishers in the
region, with this single species constituting >30% of total landings by abundance and
>25% by weight at certain locations. Preliminary examination of microsatellite markers
revealed little genetic variation amongst locations. Demography, in particular age and
growth relationships, maximum age and mortality estimates, differed considerably across
locations, with latitude (as a proxy for water temperature) and human population density
appearing as significant drivers of the observed spatial patterns. Initial results indicate
a strong relationship between otolith morphometrics (weight, length, width, thickness)
and age estimated from sectioned otoliths, suggesting that these indices may provide a
reliable estimate of age in the absence of sufficient resources to section otoliths for age
estimation. These results provide critical information for monitoring and management of
this key reef fish across its distribution.



CORAL GARDENING AS A MPA MANAGEMENT TOOL: A SUCCESS STORY IN
THE REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES (Abstract ID: 29441)

USING THE ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT TO ACHIEVE CORAL CONSERVATION
(Abstract ID: 29378)

Marine Protected Areas (MPA) promote coral reef recovery, however this is slow
and limited in most occasions. Natural and human-made threats continue and MPAs
might not be enough to assist in the recovery of coral reefs. More active conservation
measures are needed. We used “coral gardening” as an active conservation measure to
speed up coral reef conservation in the no-take MPA Cousin Island Special Reserve,
Republic of Seychelles. First, we harvested coral fragments from donor colonies or
corals of opportunity in nearby areas and reared them in mid-water rope nurseries for
about 1 year. Second, we transplanted the nursery-reared corals to a degraded reef site
site from December 2012 to April 2014. This resulted in a 300% increase in coral cover
by the end of the project. We compared the fish and benthic community structures of
a degraded control site and the transplanted site before-during-after transplantation. We
observed a five-fold increase in fish species richness, a three-fold increase in fish density,
and a two-fold increase in coral settlement and recruitment at the transplanted site. We
also analysed the costs of transplantation and the life cycle of coral reef restoration
technology. Our results support the application of large-scale, science-based coral reef

NOAA Fisheries adopted a recovery plan for the two coral species. While NOAA Fisheries is mandated to recover these species, we do not have all the resources or authorities
to implement all the activities necessary to meet the recovery goals. Thus we must
rely upon partnerships to implement recovery actions. However, the ESA does provide
several tools, which we have been using since the species we listed to promote recovery.
This paper will focus on how the ESA can be used a a tool for coral conservation. We
will present several case studies where regulatory and voluntary actions have resulted in
conservation.

233

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


coral cover averages 38% (twice that reported on mid- and outer-shelf reefs). Of the
mapped area, 11% of the seafloor has distinct reef or coral community cover, a density
comparable to that measured across the entire GBR shelf (9%). Identified coral taxa (21
genera) exhibited clear depth-stratification corresponding closely to light attenuation
and seafloor topography. Reefs have accreted relatively rapidly during the late-Holocene
(1.8-3.0 mm/y) with rates of vertical reef growth influenced by intrinsic shifts in coral
assemblages associated with reef development. Indeed, these shallow-water reefs may
have similar potential as refugia from large-scale disturbance as their deep-water (>30
m) “mesophotic” equivalents, and also provide a basis from which to model future
trajectories of reef growth within nearshore areas.

CURRENT STATE OF THE CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS IN IRANIAN COASTS OF
THE PERSIAN GULF: ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS AND AN UPDATED CHECKLIST OF THE SCLERACTINIAN CORALS (Abstract ID: 27849 | Poster ID: 346)
Persian Gulf is regarded as a unique marine ecosystem, from an ecological point, it
is dominated by some extreme environmental conditions; air temperature can rise to
above 55oC heating up the Gulf water by over 40oC and elevating its salinity to up
to 45ppt. Despite such extremes, the Gulf is a vital habitat for thousands of marine
creatures, many of which displaying remarkable adaptations to its harsh environment.
Numerous studies have been performed on the impacts of human activities on the
coral communities of the southern part of the Gulf in Arabian states, but less is known
about these impacts in Iranian shores, In this study, we have reviewed the available data
to analyze the current situation of the corals in northern Persian Gulf in relation with
anthropogenic and natural alterations. While coastal pollution by extended urbanization,
petrochemical and fisheries activities in the recent years has negatively affected the coral
lives across all coastal lines of the Gulf, compared to the southern part, there has been
less an attempt or substantial strategies to protect or restore coral biodiversity in northern Persian Gulf. Nevertheless, the Iranian waters still have a considerable contribution
to the world coral diversity by hosting more than 40 species of hard corals which have
so far been documented even from, more or less, polluted zones; yet more species are to
be discovered. Porites seems to be the most susceptible form being the dominant coral
in areas distantly located from human activities, whereas Acropora is frequently found in
more disturbed grounds.

LABORATORY INDUCED ESTRADIOL EXPOSURE STIMULATES TRANSCRIPTIONAL RESPONSES IN THE SEA ANEMONE EXAIPTASIA PALLIDA (Abstract ID:
28125)
Endocrine disruption is suspected in cnidarians but no direct hormone interactions have
been identified. Pathways associated with hormone biosynthesis and signaling are an
understudied area in cnidarian biology. Sea anemones (Exaiptasia pallida) were exposed
to 20ppb estradiol for 4 hrs. Representational Difference Analysis (RDA) was used to isolate differentially expressed transcripts associated with estradiol exposure. RNA samples
were extracted after a 4hr exposure as well as after subsequent recovery periods of
4hrs, 24hrs, 96hrs, and 7days. Quantitative Real-Time PCR quantified the expression of
17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, Niemann-Pick, Equastatin, C3, Cathepsin, and interleukin-6. These genes are known to be associated with steroid metabolism and transport,
immunity, lysosomal proteases/inhibitors, and inflammation. These genes were used
to characterize the expression profiles of laboratory induced exposures of estradiol at
20ppb, 2ppb, and 0.2ppb. Post-exposure expression profiles provide insight into how the
organism recovers from an acute exposure. These genes were also used to screen for the
specificity of response. Other anemones were exposed to 20ppb testosterone or 20ppb
cholesterol for 4 hrs. This suite of genes can generate expression profiles capable of
differentiating exposures to different sterols.


STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF CORAL HYPOXIA INDUCIBLE
FACTOR (Abstract ID: 28309)


Oxygen plays a pivotal role in the physiological adaptation of metazoans to a broad
range of terrestrial and aquatic environments. It is known that symbiotic cnidarians are
submitted to wide, rapid and daily variations of oxygen concentration. Indeed, during
daytime, intracellular O2concentrations increase due to the symbiont photosynthetic
process, while during night, respiration of both host cells and symbionts leads to intratissular hypoxia. It is well established that, in higher eukaryotes, maintenance of oxygen
homeostasis and adaptation to hypoxia require HIF that is a heterodimeric transcription
factor composed of a &alpha a &beta subunit. Whereas HIF &beta is stable, HIF &alpha
out a mechanistic study of the hypoxic response of the model coral Stylophora pistillata.
We cloned and characterized the coral HIF &alpha and &beta genes, and determined
their expression and physiological regulation. We performed structural and functional
analyses by transfecting coral HIF &alpha and HIF &beta in mammalian cells. Our
results indicate that coral HIF subunits share functional similarities with human HIFs.
Although HIF &alpha has an incomplete ODD domain relative to its human homolog, its
protein level is increased under hypoxia when tested in mammalian cells. Furthermore,
we tested HIF expression and DNA binding activity in hospite over a diel cycle (dark /
light) and in artificial hypoxic conditions.

AN EXAMINATION OF VARIATION IN BENTHIC MEGAFUANAL COMMUNITY
STRUCTURE WITH DEPTH AND SIDE OF A SEAMOUNT (Abstract ID: 30025 |
Poster ID: 322)
Increasing evidence suggests that seamounts communities are not homogenous across
a given feature, harboring a number of habitats that increase the overall diversity of
seamount communities. A number of environmental parameters may influence the
distribution of benthic species on seamounts. As part of a larger project to examine the
effects of trawling on seamounts, we conducted AUV Sentry photo transects along 3
sides of Pioneer Bank Seamount in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. A total of over
90,000m of transects were conducted at depths from 200-700m. Environmental data
including depth, substrate type, slope, slope orientation, rugosity, salinity, temperature,
and oxygen data were collected simultaneously. We present a preliminary analysis of
the benthic megafauna communities present on the seamount and correlate variations
in community structure to variations in measured environmental parameters to gain a
better understanding of the scale of variability that occurs on a single feature. Our results
add further evidence to the growing body of literature that demonstrates the variability
found on seamounts. These scales of variability need to be incorporated into science
and management plans.



IMPROVING CORAL RESTORATION THROUGH PRIOR KNOWLEDGE OF ACCLIMATION OR ADAPTATION TO LOCAL ENVIRONMENT: A COMMON GARDEN
EXPERIMENT IN A NATURAL BLEACHING EVENT (Abstract ID: 30157)

EXTENSIVE REEF DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE “MESOPHOTIC” NEARSHORE
GREAT BARRIER REEF: EVIDENCE FOR INTRA-REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN
CORAL RESILIENCE (Abstract ID: 27826)

One of the primary values of understanding climate resilience of naturally growing
corals is the opportunity to use this information to enhance the success of future restoration efforts. Here we test if prior knowledge of a coral’s experimental heat tolerance
or microhabitat allows us to predict colony-level differences in thermal tolerance that
are retained in common gardens after transplantation and acclimatization. In American
Samoa, we characterized microclimate, acute stress performance and transcriptome
response for 80 coral colonies across four species and then transplanted 800 fragments
of these corals into a common garden nursery. After a natural bleaching event in 2015,
we evaluated how bleaching severity correlated with expectations from prior knowledge
and with the observed performance of the original colonies on the reef. After 12 months,

Mean coral cover on Australia’s Great Barrier Reef (GBR) has reportedly declined by
over 15% during the last 30 years. Climate change events and outbreaks of coral disease
have been major drivers of degradation, often exacerbating the stresses caused by
in the first assessment of nearshore reef occurrence and ecology across meaningful spatial scales (15.5 sq km), we show that areas of the GBR shelf have exhibited
strong intra-regional variability in coral resilience to declining water quality. Specifically,
within the highly-turbid “mesophotic” nearshore (<10 m depth) of the central GBR,
where terrigenous seafloor sediments are persistently resuspended by wave processes,
234

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

corals with higher stress tolerance or from warmer microhabitats bleached less and
survived better than conspecifics with lower stress tolerance from cooler microhabitats.
Knowledge of microhabitat structure or variation in acute stress tolerance could provide
tools for active management to protect and restore reefs before the worst impacts of
climate change.

advisory council, and issue specific working groups in decision-making and consensus
building during the 2013 & 2014 FKNMS stakeholder process. The presentation will also
explore opportunities for use in other communities and applicability to other processes past, present and future.



THE META-GOVERNANCE OF CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28029)
Over the last two decades of environmental governance scholarship, the traditional
conceptualisation of resource governance (as undertaken by top-down governments)
has given way to a more networked understanding of resource governance (involving a
variety of public and private actors). The devolution of governance to lower orders of
government (decentralised governance) was based on the understanding that government functions more responsively and effectively at local levels. The delegation of
policy decisions to individual resource users (privatised governance) was based on the
understanding that private actors supplement governmental capacity and authority. The
coordination of actors at this level (networked governance) was based on the understanding that involving a wide range of actors enhances the certainty and legitimacy of
governing. Yet, despite the magnitude of these reforms, and their significance for efficiency, accountability and efficacy, there has been very little academic consideration of how
these new arrangements work beyond an acknowledgment of the new complexities of
governing. This paper examines the role and tools of the state, and other ‘metagovernors’, in organizing both the conditions for effective network governance, and the broader
enabling fiscal, administrative and democratic pre-conditions. It seeks to cut through the
dominant discourse on governance complexity and explore the transformations necessary to avert governance failure and achieve environmental sustainability.

QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPACT OF NOISE IN A SPACEBORNE
HYPERSPECTRAL SENSOR ON THE REMOTE DETECTION OF CORAL REEF
HEALTH REGIMES (Abstract ID: 28080)
Conventional in situ monitoring of coral reef health by underwater surveys are spatiotemporally limited and cannot be relied upon to provide regular synoptic coverage of
coral reef health. The Hyperspectral Infrared Imager (HyspIRI), with high spatial (60 m)
and spectral (10 nm) resolutions in the 380-2500 nm spectral region, provides a promising option for remotely monitoring coral reef health. However, remotely sensed data are
inevitably affected by sensor noise. We have quantitatively assessed the impact of sensor
noise on remotely detecting coral health status. Coral reefs can be classified based on
their health status as follows: (i) healthy calcifying corals, (ii) turf and coral rubble, and
(iii) fleshy macroalgae. We used a large dataset of reflectances collected in the Bahamas
from all three reef regimes to create representative reflectances for each regime. A
robust radiative transfer model was used to propagate the reef reflectance up through
the water column and the atmosphere to the sensor platform. We used published values
of the expected Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of HyspIRI to model sensor noise and its
effect on the received signal. We considered various ratios of mixed reef regimes for a
range of water quality and atmospheric conditions typically expected in coastal waters
with coral reef bottoms and quantitatively assessed how the sensor noise affects the
ability to spectrally distinguish reef health regime and, given a particular set of water
quality, atmospheric, and reef regime mix conditions, what level of SNR is required to
detect coral reef health.


DIAZOTROPH DIVERSITY AND THEIR POTENTIAL ROLE AS CORE MEMBERS
OF THE CORAL HOLOBIONT (Abstract ID: 27988)


Corals thrive in nitrogen (N) limited habitats and have therefore acquired a number of
Diazotrophs, defined as bacteria and archaea capable of fixing nitrogen, can supplement
the coral holobiont with N in the form of ammonia (NH3). Diverse diazotroph assemblages have been found in a limited number of coral species, in both adult and larval life
stages. Thus further investigation is needed to elucidate the ubiquity of diazotrophs as
part of the core coral microbiome, and their role in contributing essential N products to
both the coral host and Symbiodinium. The current study utilized gene-targeted Illumina
sequencing coupled with rates of 15N2 uptake and translocation within the holobiont
to illuminate the extent of ongoing N2 fixation within six coral species on the Great
Barrier Reef, Australia. Coral samples were collected from 15-18 m near Heron Island
Research Station and amplified using primer sets that target both the nitrogenase gene
associated with one coral species (Stylophora pistillata) will be further interpreted in the
context of concurrent measurements of 15N2 fixation rates. Results provide expanded
insight into the taxonomic diversity of coral-associated diazotrophs as well as the potential for N2-fixation within a set of globally important coral species.

THRESHOLDS IN THE BENEFITS OF BIODIVERSITY FOR MAINTAINING FISH
BIOMASS ON CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28774 | Poster ID: 473)
In studies of biodiversity and ecosystem function relationships there has been a disconnect between the results from experimental low-diversity systems and those from
high-diversity natural ecosystems. This discord is exacerbated by discussion over the
most useful metrics of biodiverseity, while empirical studies have been challenged by the
overarching effect of humans on biodiversity loss. Using Pacific-wide surveys of reefs
fishes we show that the apparent disconnect between studies of low and high diversity
systems may arise as a result of a distinct threshold in biodiversity-ecosystem function
relationships. At low diversities biomass increases rapidly, above a low threshold level
subsequent increases in biodiversity have moderate benefits. This threshold is seen in all
richness metrics while the evenness of phylogenetic diversity provides the best overall
predictor of biomass. Our results provide a empirical explanation for the apparent
paradox of contrasting BEF relationships in low vs. high diversity systems. Furthermore
the findings emphasise the importance of phylogenetic information and the utility of
traditional taxonomic groups in identifying practical measures to manage complementarity and maximise potentially harvestable biomass on coral reefs.

gov


SCIENCE FOR STAKEHOLDERS IN MPA DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT
(Abstract ID: 28394)

RECOVERY PLAN FOR ACROPORA PALMATA AND ACROPORA CERVICORNIS
(Abstract ID: 28161)

Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary (FKNMS) is undergoing its first comprehensive
review of its network of marine zones and regulations. This review is founded upon addressing the status and trends identified in its 2011 Condition Report which documented
more than a century of pressures, including a history of discharges, coastal development, habitat loss, and over exploitation of large fish and keystone species. The report
details how human actions — such as poaching, vessel groundings and discharging of
marine debris — continue to negatively affect the habitat and living resources of the
sanctuary, but that resource condition may be improved with long term management
efforts, regulatory compliance and community involvement. Since 2012, the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has been working with the Florida Keys
National Marine Sanctuary’s Advisory Council – made up of more than 50 members of
the Florida Keys marine community and government agencies – to set goals, objectives,
and then identify potential programmatic, regulatory, and zoning changes based on the
research and monitoring conducted in FKNMS over the last 25 years. This presentation will examine the use and digestion of scientific findings by the public, community

NOAA Fisheries adopted a recovery plan for the two species. The recovery plan identifies a strategy for rebuilding and assuring the long-term viability of elkhorn and staghorn
corals in the wild, allowing ultimately for the species’ removal from the list of threatened
and endangered species. The plan contains ten criteria which are targets by which to
gauge species’ recovery and identify when they no longer require the protection of the
the population by growing and actively putting corals back on the reef. Federal resources
to implement recovery plans are often very limited. Therefore, communication, coordination, and collaboration with a wide variety of stakeholders are needed to effectively
recovery plan for elkhorn and staghorn corals can be used as a guide for conservation of

235

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

the species in other countries. Because threats to elkhorn and staghorn corals are both
local and global in nature, recovery will require concerted effort on the part of domestic
and international communities.


THE EFFECTIVENESS OF LOCALLY MANAGED MARINE PROTECTED AREAS
FOR CONSERVATION OF COMMERCIALLY IMPORTANT CORAL REEF FISHES
IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 28540 | Poster ID: 634)


The Philippines has more than 1,600 locally managed marine protected areas (MPAs),
km2) and threats from overfishing are high. In this study, we assessed the effectiveness of
54 locally managed MPAs in the Philippines for conservation of commercially important
coral reef fishes. We used the fish biomass level at the nationally managed, large (332
protected for >20 years) Tubbataha Reefs National Marine Park (TRNMP) as a proxy
for “unfished” ecosystems (Bo). We also considered fish biomass levels between 25-50%
of Bo as biomass “within” the maximum sustainable yield for multi-species coral reef
fisheries (BMMSY). Results showed that fish biomass levels in 7%, 25% and 68% of
the surveyed MPAs were “above BMMSY”, “within BMMSY” and “below BMMSY”,
respectively. All of the reefs outside MPAs were either “within BMMSY” (16%) or “below
BMMSY” (84%). We also observed signs of “fishing down the food webs”, wherein the
proportion of high trophic fishes decreased with the increasing levels of exploitation
rate. Overall, the current locally managed MPAs in the Philippines are not effective
enough for coral reef fish conservation but, nonetheless, better than no MPAs at all.
Tradeoffs between fishing and conservation, particularly in setting fisheries management
targets that would take into consideration both the social and ecological sustainability of
coral reef fisheries will be discussed.

RAPID ACCLIMATION OF JUVENILE CORALS TO CO2-MEDIATED ACIDIFICATION BY UP-REGULATION OF HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN AND ANTI-APOPTOTIC
BCL-2 GENES (Abstract ID: 28197)
Corals play a key role in ocean ecosystems and carbonate balance, but their molecular
response to ocean acidification remains unclear. In this study, whole-transcriptome
analysis was used to compare the effects of acute (3-d) vs prolonged (9-d) exposure to
elevated pCO2, in juveniles of Acropora millepora. Acute exposure shows extensive
disruption of gene expression, particularly of genes involved in calcification and
metabolism. In contrast, the expression of most genes was at control levels after the 9-d
treatment, indicative of a rapid molecular acclimation to the altered environment. Heat
shock proteins and heat shock factors were over-represented amongst the genes responding to both treatments. The most obvious feature of the molecular response in the
9-d treatment was the up-regulation of five distinct Bcl-2 family members. Our efforts to
understand the functional significance of this response led to the characterization of the
context. The pro- or anti-apoptotic activities of coral Bcl-2 proteins were investigated
by expression in mammalian cells. Our results showed that most of the differentially
expressed Bcl-2 genes were anti-apoptotic. This suggests that an important component
of the corals’ longer term response to elevated CO2 is the suppression of apoptosis.
elevated CO2, a process mediated by up-regulation of specific HSPs and anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family members.


ANTI-PATHOGENIC ACTIVITY OF CORAL BACTERIA AGAINST WHITE PLAQUE
Coral disease is main factor of degrading coral reefs, such as White Plaque (WP)
disease that cause loss of epidermal tissue of coral. The purposes of this research
were to identify the bacteria associated with White Plaque Disease of coral Favia sp.
and to investigate coral bacteria that have antipatogenic potency against White Plaque
Disease of Coral Favia sp. Sampling was carried out by purposive method in Tengah
Island, Karimunjawa on March 2015. Streak method was used to isolate and purify coral
bacteria, while overlay and agar diffusion method were used to test antibacterial activity.
Identification of selected bacteria were conducted by biochemical and molecular methods. Polyphasic identification of bacteria associated with diseased coral White Plague
of Favia sp. showed that TFWP1, TFWP2, TFWP3 and TFWP4 were closely related
to Bacillus antracis, Virgibacillus olivae, Virgibacillus salarius and Bacillus mojavensis,
respectively. While antipatogen activity bacterial isolates, NM1.3, NM1.8 and NM2.3
were closely related to Pseudoalteromonas flavipulchra, Pseudoalteromonas piscicida,
Vibrio azureus, respectively. Phylogenetic data on microbial community composition in
coral will help in the knowledge on the biological control of coral diseases.


MANGROVE-CORAL HABITATS AS A NOVEL REFUGE FROM CLIMATE
CHANGE (Abstract ID: 29603)
More than 90% of the world’s coral reefs will be threatened by climate-associate
stressors and local anthropogenic impacts by 2030 under “business as usual” emissions
scenarios. Increasing temperatures and solar radiation cause coral bleaching that has
resulted in extensive coral mortality. Increasing carbon dioxide reduces seawater pH,
slows coral growth, and may cause loss of reef structure. Management strategies include
establishing marine protected areas where environmental conditions promote reef resiliency. However, few resilient reefs have been identified, and resiliency criteria are poorly
defined. We characterized mangrove communities that serve as a novel coral refuge
from thermal stress and ocean acidification for more than 30 species of scleractinians
growing directly on and under mangrove prop roots in Hurricane Hole, St. John, US
Virgin Islands. We identified resiliency factors for these mangrove-coral habitats and
show that a combination of substrate and habitat heterogeneity, proximity of different
habitat types, hydrographic conditions, and biological influences generate biogeochemical conditions that buffer against ocean acidification. Furthermore, these corals are
thriving in low-light conditions from mangrove shading and at higher temperatures than
nearby reef corals. In the Florida Keys, red mangroves line 29,000 km of shoreline, thus
representing a major potential area of refuge for reef corals. The potential and evidence
for mangrove-associate coral refugia in other locations within Atlantic, Caribbean, and
Pacific regions will also be discussed.

com

MOLECULAR DIVERSITY AND HOST SPECIFICITY OF CRUSTACEAN COPEPODS LIVING IN SYMBIOSIS WITH TWO CO-OCCURRING SPECIES OF
GALAXEA (SCLERACTINIA) FROM AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 28848)
Copepods may be found living in symbiosis with invertebrates of many different taxa,
including scleractinian corals. 18 species from 9 genera of copepods representing three
orders (Siphonostomatoida, Poecilostomatoida and Cyclopoida) have previously been
fascicularis) from New Caledonia, Indonesia and Madagascar. We studied Galaxea copepod symbionts from three widely separated sites in Australia: Heron Island and Lizard
Island (Great Barrier Reef) as well as Ningaloo Reef (Western Australia). Although abundant, many of these symbiotic copepods were previously unknown for Australia. Corals
were collected with their symbiont communities using SCUBA at depths from 5 to 21 m.
Copepod DNA was extracted using a new method that preserved copepod exoskeletons
(body length typically 1-2 mm), enabling morphological study. We analyzed nuclear
(ITS2, 18S) and mitochondrial (COI) markers of 337 specimens of all morphotypes


236

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

support very rich species diversity in South Asia. South Asian region having extensive
river deltas and diverse marine and coastal habitats supporting marine biodiversity,
however coral reefs are facing numerous threats due to natural and anthropogenic factors. Nearly one third to half of coral reef resources of South Asia are now effectively
dead and further 30 percent are threatened. Consequently, livelihoods of many reef
dependent communities are at risk. The management and conservation of coral reefs is
one of the most challenging tasks for conservationists and marine bio-resource managers in South Asia. The South Asia Coral Reef Taskforce (SACRTF) was established in
five South Asian countries sharing the Indian Ocean to facilitate and coordinate in the
management of coral reefs and associated ecosystems at national level and to promote
collaborative action at the regional level aiming at encouraging trans-boundary responses to shared environmental challenges and raising South Asia Cooperative Environment

symbiotic copepods. Molecular diversity of these symbiotic copepods, patterns of their
distribution and levels of host specificity will be discussed.

DYNAMICS OF CARBONATE CHEMISTRY, PRODUCTION AND CALCIFICATION
OF THE FLORIDA REEF TRACT (2009-2010): EVIDENCE THAT HETEROTROPHY
IS DRIVING SEASONAL DISSOLUTION (Abstract ID: 27865)
Are the reefs of the Florida Reef Tract currently in a state of positive carbonate balance? The seasonal variability in the carbonate chemistry of the waters the FRT was followed over a two-year period. Seven surveys were performed at approximately quarterly
intervals in 2009-10 across seven onshore-offshore transects comprised of 3-5 stations
spanning the upper (UK), middle (MK) and lower Keys (LK). Rates of NCP and NCC
were positive during the spring/summer, 50-72 mmol C m-2 d-1 and 13-20 mmol CaCO3
m-2d-1, respectively. During the fall/winter NCP became negative and exhibited a strong
north-south gradient (UK -58.3, MK -27.3 and LK -12.4 mmol C m-2 d-1). This trend was
mirrored in the rates of NCC (UK -20.0, MK -6.1 and LK 5.4 mmol CaCO3 m-2 d-1). A significant correlation was observed between NCC and NCP suggesting that heterotrophy
could be a driving factor accounting for the patterns in NCC (NCC=0.0002+0.29*NCP,
r2=0.53, P<0.0001). There was also evidence that NCP could be driving some of the
temporal and spatial variability in NCC indirectly as &Omegaar was significantly correlated with NCP (&Omegaar =3.65+0.0052*NCP, r2=0.46, P<0.0001). We conclude
that the upper Keys are experiencing net dissolution on an annual basis (-0.24±0.2), the
middle Keys are in an intermediate state (0.49±0.1) and the lower Keys are in the best
condition (0.80±0.2 kg CaCO3 m-2 y-1).


MESOPHOTIC CORALS OF NORTHEAST AUSTRALIA: INITIAL ESTIMATES OF
THE POTENTIAL FOR DEEP-REFUGE (Abstract ID: 28484)
Northeast Australia has a rich diversity of coral reef systems that includes the Great
Barrier Reef and atolls of the western Coral Sea. While the shallow reefs are relatively
well studied in the region, mesophotic coral communities (>30-40 m depth) are not well
documented. Here we present results obtained from the study of a large coral collection
compiled over eight expeditions from 2007 to 2014 that used deep diving, remotely
operated vehicles and dredge sampling to investigate the mesophotic zone. The collection, housed at the Queensland Museum Townsville, includes at least 59 genera and
165 species (including five potential new species), with 93% of species depth generalists
(occurring in both shallow and mesophotic zones) and 7% restricted to the mesophotic
zone. Approximately 28% of the depth generalist species were only rarely observed in the
