paleoecology and sea level. Totally 25 rock samples collected from eight locations were
studied for petrographic, geochemical and isotropic characters. Three types of facies such
as lithified beach rock (older), constructed reef facies and lithified beach rock (younger)
facies were identified in the exposed cliff. Few regions are dominated by branching and
table growth forms (Acropora), which indicate the shallow facies with low energy, whereas
most of the region is dominated by boulders (Porites and Favites), which indicate deeper
facies with high energy than branching type. The exposed reef shows a complex diagenetic history, which certainly implies the flooding and exposure phases the reef system went
through as well as climate changes. Current distribution of corals was assessed with line
intercept transects in the near-shore region of the exposed reefs and it is understood that
the study region is dominated by boulders and very few patches of acroporids. The study
provides evidence that there is a change in ecology from Holocene to present day. The
assemblage of corals, algae, bryozoans, echinoids and benthic foraminifera point towards
an inner neritic depositional environment for the raised reef during deposition.


RISING SEA LEVEL AND REEF RESPONSE IN BORA BORA, SOCIETY ISLANDS,
SOUTH PACIFIC (FRENCH POLYNESIA) (Abstract ID: 28050)
Sea-level rise was crucial for Holocene fringing and barrier reef development in Bora
Bora, because it created accommodation space and controlled reef architecture. Based
on 35 new U-series ages from corals obtained from six rotary cores, early-mid Holocene
level was subsequently exceeded by at least 1 m and eventually approached present
level. Occurrence and distribution of coral assemblages indicate an upcore increase in
wave energy. Age-depth plots further suggest that fringing and barrier reefs have prograded during the mid-late Holocene. The Holocene fringing reef is up to 20 m thick and
comprises coralgal and microbial reef sections, and abundant loose sediment, overlying
Pleistocene basalt and soil. An Acropora-Montipora assemblage transitions upcore into
a Pocillopora assemblage. Fringing reef growth started 8.78±0.05 kyr BP; accretion rates
average 6.54 m/kyr. The barrier reef consists of >30 m thick Holocene coralgal and
microbial successions, characterized by an upcore transition from an agaricid-rich to a
robust-branching Acropora assemblage. Holocene barrier reef growth began 10.03±0.05
kyr BP; accretion rates average 6.15 m/kyr. An underlying Pleistocene barrier reef
of marine isotope stage 5e, in water at least 20 m deep.


BIGGER IS BETTER: UNDERWATER IMAGE MOSAICS OF LARGE AREAS FOR
IMPROVED CORAL REEF MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT (Abstract ID: 29771)
An underwater image mosaic is a high-resolution single-image map of an area of
interest created through the alignment and blending of downward-looking component
images. Underwater image mosaic surveys retain the speed, detail, and measurement
accuracy associated with diver-based coral reef surveys while providing a superior
archival tool for documenting benthic changes over time. As a result, underwater image
mosaics have become a valuable tool for documenting marine resources as part of
both traditional monitoring programs and damage assessments intended for mitigation.
Recent technological advances, such as inexpensive high-resolution underwater cameras
and low-cost computing have increased both the speed and size of benthic surveys that
can be imaged without the use of complex underwater robotics. As a result, underwater
image mosaics have recently been used to survey over 50,000 m2 of reef around a ship
grounding, rapidly acquire 500 m2 of imagery in a single dive, and document large-scale
reef restoration success. The ability to rapidly obtain high-resolution benthic information
over large areas makes image mosaics a powerful tool for monitoring and assessing
damage when both biological information and accurate size estimates are essential for
assessing and restoring reef resources.



SHORT-TERM EXPOSURE AT CO2 VENT AFFECT SPERMATOGENESIS IN A
TEMPERATE NON-ZOOXANTHELLATE CORAL (Abstract ID: 29470)
Ocean acidification is expected to significantly affect calcifying marine organisms, such
as corals. While ocean acidification effects on coral calcification have been widely
investigated, the effects on coral gametogenesis are almost unknown. A volcanic vent at
Panarea Island (Mediterranean Sea, Italy) characterized by continuous and localized COemission, generates a stable pCO2 gradient from the centre to its periphery, providing a
2
unique natural laboratory for ocean acidification studies. Here we assessed the effects
of ocean acidification on gametogenesis and embryogenesis of the Mediterranean nonzooxanthellate coralLeptopsammia pruvoti transplanted along this natural pCO2 gradient.
After 3 months under experimental conditions, increasing pCO2 seemed to negatively
influence spermary production and development. In the control Site, all spermaries
showed the latest (most advanced) maturation stage while in the most acidic Sites they
also displayed earlier stages, indicating a delay in spermatogenesis and consequently of
fertilization and planulation processes. Considering the negative response showed by this
species after a short-term exposure, an even stronger negative effect on sexual reproduction is hypothesized under a long-term exposure.

VARIABILITY IN CORAL RECRUITMENT ALONG THE FLORIDA REEF TRACT
(Abstract ID: 29685)
Reef resilience to global climate change is enhanced when coral recruitment rates
exceed mortality rates. Along the Florida Reef Tract (FRT), USA, there is consensus that
recruitment failure is impeding coral recovery, but the temporal and spatial variability in
this parameter is unknown. We are quantifying interannual variation in scleractinian and
octocoral recruitment to 15x15 cm terracotta tiles and natural substrata across much
employed by the Coral Reef Evaluation and Monitoring Project were selected, thus
allowing comparative analysis of the role that extant biological communities and water
temperatures play in coral recruitment processes. Young coral recruits (<3 months old)
are often difficult to identify to the species level, so a further transformative aspect of this
project is development of a PCR-based system that incorporates species-specific molecular markers to identify recruits. To date we have deployed 32 tile pairs at each site, a total
120

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

allow it access to entrapped fine sediments not easily reached by large deposit feeders.
Quantitative sampling along the Uva Island forereef, from 3 to 6 m depth, revealed median population densities of 1.2 to 7.2 ind per 20 liters of sediment sampled over a four
year (2002-2006) period. In terms of reef area sampled, this is equivalent to 4.8 to 28.8
ind per m. These abundances held steady through the wet and dry seasons. Echiurans
are presently known to inhabit coral reefs in Australia, Hawaii, and at upwelling and nonupwelling sites in the eastern Pacific. An important role in nutrient recycling is likely to be
recognized as studies of this taxon proceed.

of 1,920 tiles. A preliminary analysis of a subset of tiles indicates low recruitment rates,
0.2 recruits per tile, consisting exclusively of brooding coral species. Development of the
molecular markers is well underway for 16 coral species and shows promise as a tool for
verifying recruit identity. In sum, this study is informing management efforts within the
FRT by identifying recruitment hotspots, as well as those sites and species having limited
ability to counter climate change stressors through natural recruitment processes.


BEYOND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES: EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE OF THE CAUSAL
MECHANISMS LINKING MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND HUMAN WELLBEING FROM PAPUA, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 29711)

SMALL FISH REVEAL THE BIG PICTURE ON CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28285)

Recent conservation policy and practice has emphasized the central role of ecosystem
services in shaping human well-being. For example, marine protected area (MPA) narratives are dominated by the role of protection in enhancing food security and incomes
through increased fish biomass. But, ecosystem services do not represent the only
pathway linking conservation and human well-being. Scholars have long recognized
the potential for impacts to emerge from the restructuring of resource rights and the
infrastructure linked to conservation interventions, as alternative pathways by which
conservation efforts may affect local communities. We present empirical evidence of
the multiple pathways linking the establishment of MPAs to human well-being in coral
reef ecosytems. Drawing on a quasi-experimental impact evaluation of six MPAs in the
Bird’s Head Seascape, Indonesia, we examine five distinct pathways by which MPAs
affect human well-being, including ecosystem services, property rights reallocation, MPA
management infrastructure and ancillary opportunities. Structural equation modeling
reveals the existence of multiple pathways, initiated by MPA establishment that generate
an array of short-term social impacts. We examine the synergies and trade-offs among
pathways, as well as the relative importance of unintended pathways. In so doing, we illustrate the incentives, and constraints to the long-term sustainability of MPAs, highlighting the need for a more nuanced understanding of conservation-poverty relationships as
the basis for more effective policy and practice.

Although Glenn may be better remembered for his work on connectivity and marine
reserves, he made great advances in studying the settlement and predation of small
fishes on coral reefs. Small fishes play critically important roles in coral reef ecosystems,
yet unfortunately for them, reefs represent high risk habitats. Upon settlement, many
small fishes face extremely high mortality rates, which can range from 6% to almost
70% per day. Given the danger of being small on a coral reef, it is surprising that such a
large number of fishes such as gobies and blennies stay small throughout their lives. In
this presentation I will consider small fishes, whether juveniles or adults; introduce what
is currently known about their important functional roles on coral reefs, then present
results from a series of recent studies that offer insights into the dynamic nature of small
fish communities. I will demonstrate how the short lifespans, fine niche-partitioning and
high mortality rates of small fishes result in diverse and highly structured assemblages
that anchor many trophic pathways and may prove to be sensitive indicators of environmental change. I will also highlight a previously overlooked role of small fishes as predators on coral reefs. These recent findings suggest that the high mortality rates observed
in small fishes may be a result of feeding by overlooked cryptic predators. Indeed, some
of these small fishes may be the most important predators on coral reefs.

Dania, FL, USA

BIOCHEMICAL AND BACTERIAL COMMUNITY CHANGES DURING THE
COURSE OF PATHOGENESIS IN THE SPONGE DISEASE APLYSINA RED BAND
SYNDROME (Abstract ID: 28441)
Sponges are essential ecological components of coral reefs, and like corals, sponge
diseases have been reported with increasing frequency worldwide. Aplysina Red Band
Syndrome (ARBS) is widespread across the Caribbean basin, affecting up to 10% of
Aplysina cauliformis, one of the most common members of the Caribbean sponge community. ARBS significantly impacts sponge physiology and, ultimately, sponge growth,
survival and population dynamics. ARBS is highly transmissible via sponge-to-sponge
contact, enabling us to identify biochemical and bacterial community changes in sponges
over the course of pathogenesis. We performed 9-day contact experiments with healthydiseased and healthy-healthy control treatments in the Bahamas in January and July. We
compared individual sponges sampled initially and at successive time points to characterize short-term temporal changes in concentrations of chlorophyll a (associated with the
loss of cyanobacterial symbionts), total protein, secondary metabolites, and heat shock
protein, as well as bacterial assemblages. All healthy sponges in contact with diseased
sponges developed ARBS by day 9 and observed changes correspond with the timing of
ARBS development. Several biochemical markers, and bacterial assemblages, of initially
healthy sponges that developed ARBS during the experiment shifted towards those of
naturally diseased sponges over this time period. This represents one of few studies to
evaluate temporal changes over the course of pathogenesis in a marine invertebrate.

INSIGHTS ON THE PERSISTENCE OF THE WELLINGTON REEF IN THE NORTHERN GALAPAGOS ISLANDS: A MODELING PERSPECTIVE (Abstract ID: 27832)
Wellington Reef is the largest known structural reef in the Galápagos Islands. This study
explores the recovery potential of the Wellington Reef using a stochastic simulation that
employs empirical data on coral growth, bioerosion, fecundity, recruitment, bleaching
and mortality from the Wellington Reef and nearby sites. A probabilistic model was
developed to estimate CaCO3 erosion of individual coral colonies by the sea urchinEucidaris galapagensis. The daily mobility behavior of Eucidaris was approximated using
empirical observations obtained from other sea urchin species demonstrating similar
foraging behavior. A non-central chi-squared distribution provided the foundation for
modeling the expected number ofEucidaris visits a coral colony may experience. Numerous projections 50 years into the future were performed utilizing sea urchin density distributions ranging from very low to very high obtained from local surveys. We subjected
each projection to El Niño event schedules that offer plausible future oceanographic
disturbances based on recent historical event frequencies. We evaluated the survivability
of the Wellington reef by analyzing the net CaCO3 production on an annual basis over
a 50-year projection period. Moderate levels of sea urchin densities above current very
low densities may significantly increase the likelihood of collapse of the Wellington Reef.



CORAL REEF ECHIURANS: AN UNDERSTUDIED CRYPTIC FAUNA (Abstract ID:
27821)

CHARACTERIZING PARTICIPATION IN NON-COMMERCIAL FISHING AND

Recent sampling of the cryptic fauna of a pocilloporid patch reef in Panama has
revealed high abundances of an undescribed species of the echiuranAnalassorhynchus sp.
This species is relatively small (2-4 cm) and secretive, inhabiting fine sand/silt sediments
beneath coral rubble and simulated frameworks. The guts of all examined specimens
were packed with sand grains, shell fragments, and particulate organic matter, evidence
of deposit feeding and a potentially important contribution to nutrient recycling. The
occurrence of Analassorhynchus sp. in the deep recesses of carbonate structures would

USVI fish for enjoyment, to gather food, to bond with others, as well as for gifting and
other traditional activities. From December 2013 - October 2014, researchers walked the
shores of St. Croix to gather information on shore-based fishing and other recreational
activities. A primary goal for this study was to assess fishing effort for non-commercial
fishing conducted from shore, as well as to document levels of participation in other

121

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Periodically harvested closures (PHCs) are small fisheries closures that range from being
mostly closed to mostly open to fishing. We provide the first comprehensive assessment of
PHCs to provide short-term fisheries benefits across Fiji and the broader Western Pacific.
PHCs in Fiji consistently decreased the wariness of larger targeted fish species, but were
less likely to increase abundance or biomass. PHCs in the Western Pacific had a 48%
greater abundance and 92% greater biomass of targeted species when compared with areas open to fishing, suggesting they are capable of providing short-term protection benefits.
Harvesting PHCs results in a rapid increase in wariness and decrease in the abundance
and biomass of targeted fishes. Factors affecting the ability of PHCs to provide short-term
protection and harvest benefits included size, duration of closure and compliance. Strict
controls are needed during openings to optimize future benefits. One year of PHC closure
was insufficient for the recovery of pre-harvest protection benefits, which were principally
observed for species with low and moderate vulnerabilities to fishing. Despite the ability of
PHCs to provide some short-term fisheries benefits, a broader range of fisheries management and conservation strategies are needed for the long term sustainability of small-scale
fisheries in the Western Pacific.

shore-based activities. The study found that the number of fishers using the shoreline
at any given time during the study was relatively low compared with people engaged
in other recreational activities. However, findings indicate that particular areas, times
of day, and days of the week were more popular with shore-based fishers than others.
Observing, walking, swimming, sunbathing, camping and snorkeling were the most
common non-fishing activities documented during the study period. Shoreline areas near
population centers exhibited higher numbers of people engaged in recreational activities
than more remote areas of the island. The study found that shore-based, non-commercial fishing on St. Croix was not as commonplace as expected, but that the shoreline is
important to the community for a variety of other recreational activities.

A COMPARISON OF DISEASE PREVALENCE IN WILD AND OUTPLANTEDACROPORA CERVICORNIS COLONIES ALONG THE FLORIDA REEF TRACT (Abstract
ID: 29027)


CLIMATE CHANGE, THE GREAT BARRIER REEF, AND THE RESPONSE OF AUSTRALIANS (Abstract ID: 30151 | Poster ID: 600)

As coral restoration projects become more common there are important ecological
questions to be addressed, such as the health of outplanted corals in relation to the
natural reef community. Here we examined data from multiple projects to make preliminary comparisons of disease prevalence in wild and outplanted Acropora cervicornis
covering three Florida regions: Broward County (BWD), Middle Keys (MDK) and Dry
was calculated for every monitoring event (annual to monthly) between 2010 and 2015
for each region and all outplant projects. The overall mean colony prevalence of disease
per event, all projects combined, was 3.4%. Disease was most prevalent during summer
months for wild and outplanted populations. MDK wild colonies had the highest mean
prevalence of disease per monitoring event, whereas outplanted colonies had the lowest
mean prevalence of disease per event. The highest prevalence of disease for any one
event was recorded on wild colonies in BWD during the Summer 2015 at 18.5%. These
data indicate that the prevalence of disease in outplanted corals across multiple years
and during outbreak events is similar to, if not less than, that recorded across the entire
Florida Reef Tract for wild colonies. These data also provide further evidence that
outplanted corals respond to stressors similar to wild colonies and currently are not a
significant health risk to wild coral populations.

Inspiration, aspirations, attitudes, and perception of threats play a pivotal role in the
way that individuals associate themselves with natural environments. These sentiments
affect how people connect to natural places, including their behaviours, perceived
responsibility, and management interventions they support. World Heritage Areas hold
an important place in the lives of people who visit, aspire to visit, or derive a sense of
security and wellbeing from their existence. Yet, the connection between people and
special places is rarely quantified and policymakers find it difficult to incorporate these
human dimensions into decision-making processes. Here we describe the personal
concern and connection that Australians have with the Great Barrier Reef and discuss
how the results may help with management. We utilise a statistically representative
sample of Australian residents (n= 2,002) and show empirically that climate change is
perceived to be the biggest threat to the Great Barrier Reef, and that the Great Barrier
Reef inspires Australians, promotes pride, and instills a sense of individual identity and
collective responsibility to protect it. An increased understanding of the high levels of
personal connection to iconic natural resources may help managers to enhance public
support for protecting climate-sensitive systems within Australia and around the world.

OPTIMIZING OUTPLANT SUCCESS FOR ACROPORA CERVICORNIS: AN ASSESSMENT OF VARYING COLONY DENSITY, SIZE AND ATTACHMENT TECHNIQUES
(Abstract ID: 28404)
The most widely used coral species in the greater Caribbean for reef restoration is Acropora cervicornis. However, best outplant methodologies in terms of colony density, size
and attachment technique have not yet been adequately evaluated. Two studies were
In the first study, colonies 10-15 cm total linear extension(TLE) were outplanted using
a nail, epoxy and cable tie at densities of 1, 4 or 25 corals per 2 m2 plot, each density
was replicated 12 times. Colonies outplanted in the second study were of small (5-10
cm TLE), medium (11-30) or large (31-50) size class and outplanted using nail and cable
tie, epoxy or cement puck. Each size class was replicated 45 times per attachment technique. In the first study, survival after 2 years was highest for corals outplanted at 1 coral
per 2 m2 and lowest for corals outplanted at 25 corals per 2 m2. The number of colonies
missing and overall prevalence of disease and predation was greatest in high density
plots. In the second study (9 months), corals attached using a nail and cable tie, regardless of size, was the most successful in terms of survival. Large corals had the highest
rate of survival over small and medium corals. A majority of coral loss was attributed to
missing corals, which was highest for the puck technique and also small epoxied corals.
These results indicate that greatest outplant success may be achieved by using a nail and
cable tie to attach larger colonies at a minimum spacing of 2 m.

DETECTING HOURLY TO DAILY VARIABILITY IN SUBMARINE GROUNDWATER
PLUMES, NUTRIENTS AND FLUORESCENT DISSOLVED ORGANIC MATTER AT
A CORAL REEF IN MAUNALUA BAY, HI (Abstract ID: 29707 | Poster ID: 461)
Submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) can deliver high concentrations of dissolved
inorganic nutrients (DIN; N, P, Silicate) to Maunalua Bay, Oahu, Hawaii. Our previous
research has demonstrated that fluorescent dissolved organic matter (fDOM) is a useful
biogeochemical tracer of SGD, but we know little of how hourly to daily variation in SGD
may alter dissolved nutrient distributions across reefs. Here, we present data tracking the
temporal and spatial variation in SGD, fDOM and dissolved nutrient distributions over a
9-day period at Black Point, Maunalua Bay. Four coastal ocean sites were sampled over
an onshore to offshore spatial gradient: the submarine spring, 2 sites in the transition
zone, and a near-reef crest “marine-like” site. Samples were collected for fDOM, radon,
temperature, salinity, DIN, dissolved organic carbon and nitrogen (DOC and DON), chlorophyll a, and microbial abundance and diversity. Our results reveal that Black Point SGD
has cooler temperatures, lower salinity, and higher radon and dissolved inorganic nutrient
concentrations than that of “marine-like” waters. We also observed clear temporal and
spatial patterns in the enrichment and decline of SGD and DIN at each site, and were
able to resolve significant enrichment at the “marine-like” site. Patterns in fDOM will be
discussed as they relate to tracing SGD at each site. These results provide new information on the effects of SGD on coastal coral reef nutrient dynamics over hourly to weekly
timescales and as a function of tides and land hydrology.


PERIODICALLY HARVESTED CLOSURES PROVIDE SHORT-TERM FISHERIES
BENEFITS (Abstract ID: 28424)

122

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


the two sites studied. The abundance of brown algae from aDNA was negatively related
to the abundance of the most dominant corals for both sites. Our results demonstrate the
ability for reef sediments to record environmental aDNA, providing a valuable archive for
understanding past distributions and relative abundance of important reef dwellers that do
not fossilize. This information can be used to detect temporal trends in the frequency and
magnitude of past coral to macro-algae phase shifts over decadal to millennial time scales.

REFUGIA AND RESILIENCE: VARIABLE POPULATION DEMOGRAPHICS AND
REPRODUCTION OF A CORAL REEF FISH ACROSS VERTICAL SPATIAL SCALES
(Abstract ID: 29782)


With the decline of coral reef ecosystems, reef organisms may become dependent upon
habitats at the periphery of their distributions for population persistence. Mesophotic
coral reefs (30-150 m), near the depth boundary of most reef fishes, may be natural
refuges that can supply larvae to degraded reefs, and are buffered from anthropogenic
and natural disturbances. However, depth-driven habitat variability can mediate the
refuge function of mesophotic reefs by affecting demographic parameters that influence
population resilience and connectivity. We compared population density and structure,
size, growth, and reproduction of a model reef fish (bicolor damselfish: Stegastes partitus)
across shallow shelf (<10 m) and deep shelf (20-30 m) reefs in the Florida Keys, and
mesophotic reefs (60-70 m) at Pulley Ridge to assess the refuge function of peripheral
habitats. As depth increased, populations were comprised of older and larger individuals,
and density decreased, suggesting that mesophotic populations are limited by replenishment of young fish. Otolith-derived ages, measurements of oocyte area, and batch
fecundity indicated that mesophotic fish reach larger asymptotic sizes, and have longer
lifespans and higher reproductive investment than fish in shallower habitats. Reliance
on long-lived individuals for population persistence may decrease ecosystem resilience,
however, by supporting populations of large, long-lived individuals, mesophotic reefs
may be important sources of larvae for shallow fish populations and may function as
valuable refuges for future populations.

GENETIC DIVERSITY RELATED TO HABITAT IN THE REEF BUILDING CORAL
ACROPORA PALMATA (Abstract ID: 28426)
The critically endangered Acropora palmata plays a unique role throughout the Caribbean region. It has a life history strategy that combines sexual (genet recruitment)
and asexual (ramet recruitment) reproduction. The spatial distribution of genets and
ramets are expected to change as a function of the frequency with which this species
were randomly sampled on 7 reefs along the Caribbean coast of Mexico. Habitats were
identified as high (HWZ) and low (LWZ) wave action zones. Application of microsatellite
markers resulted in 297 multilocus genotypes. Estimates of allelic and clonal diversity
were calculated, and fine-scale spatial genetic structure (SGS) characterized. Estimates
No SGS was detected when considering each genet once. However, positive SGS was
detected in both HWZ and LWZ at the ramet-level, with an estimated clonal range of 27
m and 58 m, respectively. A statistical difference in SGS between habitats was also identified. Estimates of allelic diversity were significantly higher in HWZ, providing further
diversity. We suggest that clonal range is mainly determined by wave action along the
Mexican Reef Tract, perhaps due to differential rates of fragmentation and/or due to
lower rates of fragment survivorship in high-energy habitats. When restoring reefs with
nursery-reared fragments, existing habitat differences in genotypic and genetic diversity
should be considered.


BLUE THE DIVE: AN INNOVATIVE PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE OCEAN
CONSERVATION COMMUNITY AND THE SCUBA INDUSTRY (Abstract ID: 30166
| Poster ID: 637)
SCUBA professionals, scientists, and recreational divers are first-hand witnesses to the
destruction of marine and coral habitats, which includes potential adverse impacts
from divers themselves. The SCUBA industry is in a position to promote and advance
responsible stewardship of the ocean by both changing the way that people interact with
their underwater environment and inspiring them to advocate for marine conservation.
However, there has been no substantive, effort to organize the dive community. NOAA’s
National Marine Sanctuary Program began a campaign in 2007 but shelved it because
they did not have the backing of the SCUBA industry. In 2013, a new initiative called
Blue the Dive (BTD) originated in Boulder, Colorado that aims to create partnerships
between the conservation community and the dive industry. The mission of BTD is to
promote a strong and unified voice for ocean protection driven by the dive community,
improve SCUBA industry sustainability practices, create a more informed and educated
consumer, support scientific research, and promote actions that protect the ocean. So
far, BTD has organized 3 well-attended symposia at Diving Equipment & Marketing Association (DEMA) meetings (the dive industry’s largest trade show), created a BTD social
media presence, developed guidelines on “How to be a Blue Diver and Blue Dive Shop”,
sponsored a BTD Pledge with 2000 signatures, partnered with Blue Certified (an ecocertification program), and filmed messages of support from over 20 industry leaders.



THE 2014-2016 GLOBAL CORAL BLEACHING EVENT: PRELIMINARY COMPARISONS BETWEEN THERMAL STRESS AND BLEACHING TIMING AND INTENSITY (Abstract ID: 28759 | Poster ID: 343)
Rising ocean temperatures have increased the frequency of coral bleaching events.
The extremely strong El Niño in 1997/98 triggered bleaching that killed about 16%
of the world’s coral. In 2010, during a mild El Niño year, elevated ocean temperatures
resulted in mass bleaching events in many parts of the world. Currently during another
record-strength El Niño event, another global bleaching event has been underway since
mid-2014. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Coral Reef
Watch (CRW) is undertaking an effort to collect and document reports of the severity
and extent of the ongoing bleaching event. CRW is collating bleaching data (including
reports of no bleaching) from collaborators for the period 2014 through at least 2016. In
situ bleaching observations are compared with CRW’s satellite measurements of bleaching thermal stress to test CRW’s thermal stress monitoring products, including the Coral
Bleaching HotSpot and Degree Heating Week products. This presentation explores
the timeline of record thermal stress and bleaching occurring globally from 2014-2016
based on the comprehensive in situ bleaching observations CRW has collected to date.
Preliminary results from comparisons of bleaching patterns with CRW’s satellite products will be discussed for coral reef regions around the globe.

USE OF ANCIENT DNA TO UNDERSTAND CORAL-MACROALGAE INTERACTIONS AT MILLENNIAL SCALES (Abstract ID: 28969)
Phase shifts and the declining ability of ecosystems to recover from disturbances are now
commonplace in marine environments. On the inshore Great Barrier Reef (GBR), coral
dominance has shifted fromAcropora to weedier coral species reducing ecosystem resilience. Phase shifts have also resulted in the replacement of corals by fleshy macro-algae.
study of the fossil record within the cores, we found recent unprecedented disruption
of millennia-scale dominance of Acropora. The timing of these shifts is consistent with
degrading water quality associated with European colonization of the adjacent coastline.
Using ancient DNA (aDNA), here we test whether shifts in coral community composition
were associated with changes in macro-algae abundance. All of the sediment samples
studied yielded aDNA across the past 750 years. Multivariate analysis of 12 functional
groups showed significant temporal variation in the aDNA community structure of one of

123

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


structed. The results suggest: (1) the Dongsha Island is a sand cay that formed by detrital
deposition entirely with no Holocene coral reef or coral conglomerate underneath; (2)
the sand-cay deposition might have started since 8150±130 cal yrBP and continued
with sea-level rise; (3) the sand cay built up by aggradation with no sign of progradation;
(4) the top of limestone basement under the island descends gradually from 13.6 bmsl
water depth was relatively deeper. It is interpreted that the island formed mainly by: (1)
deflection of waves from the east by the atoll; (2) tidal currents coming from north and
south via the two channels; (3) northeast and southwest monsoons.

DESIGNING AN ASIAN MARINE HERITAGE: FISHING FOR PEACE (Abstract ID: 30073)


Establishing a Network of Marine Protected Areas (MPA) in the West Philippine Sea
(NeWPS) is a Philippine contribution to the goals of the Coral Triangle Initiative (CTI). Its
“Strategic Action Plan,” referred to as the Regional Plan of Action (RPOA), proposes to
harmonize the multiple uses in this vast marine geographic area for the benefit of future
generations. Multilateral efforts to institute a code of conduct, particularly by establishing
MPAs, in disputed areas such as the South China Sea have been proposed. However,
these have often been suspected as a prelude to other non-negotiable concerns, primarily
as regards sovereignty. We explore the scientific tasks, opportunities, and global imperatives in pursuing the functionality of MPA networks for the region. These provide the impetus for scientific collaboration that can pave the way for consensus-building strategies.
The basis and design of an MPA network as an Asian Marine Heritage shall emphasize:
(i) marine biodiversity conservation, (ii) fisheries resilience through adaptive management,
(iii) joint research and monitoring to meet the climate change challenge, and (iv) assured
safety of navigation. Design considerations for cooperative arrangements are presented to
explain how Science and Technology can Enhance Wise Stewardship and Resiliency of
Development Systems. These processes can accelerate the resilience of social-ecological
systems, and highlight shared and complementary responsibilities among network partners. Win-win solutions are proposed for these offshore reefs to sustain and move towards
inclusive development by parking our differences for this threatened world heritage.

OSTREOBIUM DIVERSITY IN THE SCROLL CORAL, AGARICIA UNDATA, AT
(Abstract ID: 29594 | Poster ID: 130)
Endolithic algae have important functions in reef ecosystems and will have a critical role
in how coral tolerate climate change and ocean acidification. Endolithic algal filaments
dissolve CaCO3 crystals making reefs more susceptible to abrasion and dissolution and
serve as food for bioeroders. These algae can also facilitate coral survival during bleaching
events extending their survivorship without zooxanthellae. In the Caribbean, members
of the family Agariciidae are commonly the dominant species in the deeper portions of
coral reefs. Agaricia undata, inhabits deep reefs between 15 and about 90 m; this coral
is associated with dinoflagellates of the genus Symbiodinium as well as endolithic algae
(Ostreobium quekettii). A high abundance of Ostreobium sp. has been observed as depth
and SEM and we found a longitudinal growth and high density of the algae. Using the
mesophotic coral ecosystems of San Andrés Island in Colombia to test if depth has an
effect on Ostreobium composition. We identified five Ostreobium clades, but did not
identify a depth-associated pattern. We have yet to determine if the different clades found
different adaptations that facilitate photosynthesis in low light environments



INDUCTION OF CORAL LARVAL SETTLEMENT BY CRUSTOSE CORALLINE
ALGAE (Abstract ID: 27975)
Crustose coralline algae (CCA) are essential for the functioning of coral reefs ecosystems
as they create reef structures through calcification, stabilize the reef framework by
binding coral rubble, and induce coral recruitment. The presence of CCA is important
for settlement of coral larvae, but whether the settlement-inducing compounds are produced by CCA or by their associated bacteria, is still not well understood. We conducted
experiments to determine the mechanisms by which CCA induce the settlement of
coral larvae, focusing on discerning the contribution of CCA itself and their associated
bacteria. We used an orthogonal experimental design with four factors: 1) CCA species,
2) bacteria associated with CCA, 3) allelochemicals produced by CCA, and 4) dissolved
millepora was added to each treatment. The results showed that these larvae need environmental cues to settle. Nevertheless, larval settlement can be triggered only by certain
CCA and the inductiveness varies among species. The CCA Titanoderma sp. exhibited a
striking capacity to induce larval metamorphosis, up to 98%. The CCA allelochemicals
were the primary inducers of coral settlement, while the DOC produced by the CCA
and the bacteria associated with the CCA tissue played a secondary role in the inductive
mechanism. However, the highest settlement rate was attained due to a synergistic
effect between CCA and their associated bacteria. Thereby, my research identified key
mechanisms driving coral larval settlement.

LOCAL VS GLOBAL STRESSORS: THE CASE OF CUBAN CORAL REEF (Abstract
ID: 28087)
Coral reef studies from four regions of Cuba carried out between 2001 and 2014 were
compiled to assess influence of local stressors versus global ones. Regions studied
were Los Colorados archipelago (northwestern), Sabana – Camagüey archipelago
(northeastern), Punta Francés (southwestern) and Jardines de la Reina (southeastern).
Fishes (density and biomass) and stony corals (density, sizes, diseases and recruitment)
were assessed in the four region using underwater visual censuses. The result were
compared taking into account fishing pressure, law enforcement, pollution, sedimentation, sea temperature, frequency and strength of hurricanes, information gathered from
several sources. Fish density and biomass, in general, were higher where fishing pressure
was lower and where law enforcement was stronger. Large, endangered and top predator
fishes were more abundant and larger in well-enforced protected areas than outside
them. Jardines de la Reina Marine Reserve showed the best fish condition among the
four region. Stony corals condition, in general, was better where pollution and sedimentation were lower, with diverse response to increase sea temperature and frequency and
strength of hurricane. The fact that most affectations to stony coral were bleaching and
ancient mortality is an indicator of a better condition of Cuban corals when compared
to Caribbean and world ones. No consistent regional pattern was observed on stony
coral among the four regions studied. These results support the hypothesis that Cuban
coral reefs condition was more related to local stressors than to global ones.


ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE DONGSHA ISLAND, SOUTH CHINA SEA
IN THE HOLOCENE (Abstract ID: 28145 | Poster ID: 397)
The Dongsha Island is the only island of Dongsha Atoll in the north of South China
Sea. The atoll stands about 300-400 meters above sea floor with a diameter of 25 km.
The water depth in the lagoon is mostly 10-15 m, maximum 23 m. The island occurs on
the inner (lagoonal side) reef flat between two wide channels on leeward (west) side of
the atoll, and measures 2.7 km in length (East-West) and 0.88 km in width. The west tip
of the island is 0.7 km away from the atoll margin. To explore the Holocene history of
Dongsha Island, this study drilled 4 cores of 20-23.3 m in depth, 3 on the Island and 1
on the reef flat west to the island. Lithocolumns were established, and a total of 16 fossil
corals were dated by AMS C-14 or U-Th methods and an E-W profile was recon-


MUESO SUBACUATICO DE ARTE (MUSA) AN EFFECTIVE PROJECT TO REDIRECT AND CONTROL VISITORS IN THE NATIONAL PARK OF CANCUN – ISLA
Protected areas management requieres the use of new ideas to provide effective conservation mechanisms. In Mexico, the use of Carrying capacities or Limits of aceptable
change are, by law, mechanisms to incorporate in the management Programs in order to

124

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

traditional measure of rugosity, and provide insights into which aspects of complexity
are most important. Applying these technologies clearly improved on traditional approaches, while providing new insights into species associations with reef structure and
the implications of flattening reefs.

control the number of visitors but these are diffcult to implement. In the National Park
of Cancun Isla Mujeres, aproximately 700 thousand tourist visit this protected area of
which 196 thousand (28%) scuba dive in the different coral reef formations. Between
2004 and 2005 coral reef coverage was severly reduced due to three hurricanes of
which one was Category 5. Reef restoration Projects were implemented. However, it
was decided that a Project redirecting tourist away from coral formations should be
designed. The Project commenced with artifical hábitats. In 2008 the implementation of
an uderwater Art Museum began to be designed. In 2009 first sculptures were installed
and by 2015 more than 520 sculptures have been deployed. MUSA as it is now known
has been very succesful. The redirection effect has been assessed and in only one coral
reef formation close to 32 thousand tanks are now being used in one of the MUSA
galleries. The Project has increased the income of small and large permissionaires and
is raising contributions from visitors to increase and maintain the number of sculptures.
Though controversial, this Project is now being seen as one great idea to be used in the
management of areas with great numbers of visitors.


KI‘INA A‘O LAWAI‘A (Abstract ID: 30143)
This presentation will introduce concepts and traditions of lawai’a (Hawaiian Fishing
Practices) which represents an applied pedagogy for marine resource management.
The implementation of this cultural practice at the community level is vital to achieving
long-term management success. Lawai’a provides a pathway for developing reciprocal
relationships between resource users and the natural environment.


ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS OF LIONFISH AGGREGATIONS ON MESOPHOTIC
REEFS IN BERMUDA (Abstract ID: 28391)
Recent surveys in Bermuda have revealed dense aggregations of lionfish on mesophotic
reefs (60m depth), yet these densities are not pervasive across reefs at this depth. Using
diver-led in situ surveys of mesophotic reef sites, this study examines how variations in
prey fish communities may affect lionfish distribution. A significant correlation was found
between prey fish biomass and lionfish density, where sites with a higher biomass of prey
fish have higher densities of lionfish. Species-specific correlations of prey fish biomass
with lionfish density revealed a significant positive correlation between lionfish density
and juvenile Paranthias furcifer biomass, however correlations of lionfish density with
other prey fish species were not significant. These data indicate that lionfish densities
may be driven by distribution and availability of preferred prey types, as gut content
the biodiversity of reef communities, however, these data represent baseline assessments of mesophotic fish assemblages, and thus continued monitoring is needed to
accurately assess the impacts of these invasive predators.

HOLOBIONT PHYSIOLOGICAL ADJUSTMENTS OF THE CORAL ORBICELLA
FAVEOLATA ALONG A LARGE DEPTH GRADIENT (Abstract ID: 29642)
Light is the primary factor controlling coral photosynthesis rates and, consequently,
CaCO3 production. The vertical species distribution of Scleractinian corals is directly
related to the attenuation coefficient of light (Kd), which also modulates holobiont
acclimation to the exponential loss of light intensity with depth. Little research has been
conducted to understand the key physiological adjustments behind the plasticity inherent to species able to colonize large depth gradients, in addition to their documented
morphological depth-related changes. The progressive increase in tissue pigmentation
with depth allows maximizing solar energy collection, but has a structural limit related to
tissue self-shading. This structural constraint could be central to determine Symbiodinium photosynthesis, and thus, holobiont capacity to maintain positive carbon balances
under light limiting conditions. Here we present an analysis of the variation of holobiont
photophysiology along a large depth-gradient (from 5 to 40 m, Akumal, Mexican Caribbean), for a very plastic coral species, Orbicella faveolata. We examined the variation in
holobiont photosynthesis and pigmentation, and the effect of depth on the photosynthetic and light absorption efficiencies of the holobiont. We also determined the functional
traits that allowed the holobiont to achieve positive carbon balances with depth, and,
therefore, are central to maintain coral growth under light limitation.


POPULATION STRUCTURE OF MONTASTRAEA CAVERNOSA ON SHALLOW VERSUS MESOPHOTIC REEFS IN BERMUDA (Abstract ID: 29466 | Poster ID: 332)


Mesophotic coral reef ecosystems remain largely unexplored with only limited information available on taxonomic composition, abundance and distribution. Yet, mesophotic
reefs may serve as potential refugia for shallow-water species and thus understanding
biodiversity, ecology and connectivity of deep reef communities is integral for resource
management and conservation. The Caribbean coral, Montastraea cavernosa, is considered a depth generalist and is commonly found at mesophotic depths. We surveyed
upper mesophotic (45m) sites in Bermuda and found population structure was depth dependent. The mean surface area of colonies at mesophotic sites was significantly smaller
than at shallow sites, suggesting that growth rates and maximum colony surface area
are limited on mesophotic reefs. Colony density was significantly higher at mesophotic
sites, however, resulting in equal contributions to overall percent cover. Size-frequency
distributions between shallow and mesophotic sites were also significantly different with
populations at mesophotic reefs skewed towards smaller individuals. Overall, the results
of this study provide valuable baseline data on population structure, which indicate that

PARTITIONING THE EFFECTS OF STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY ON THE INTRAHABITAT DISTRIBUTION OF CORAL REEF FISHES (Abstract ID: 28885)
Structural complexity is strongly linked to biodiversity and functioning throughout
a number of systems. On coral reefs, the abundance and diversity of fish are often
associated with habitat structure. This complexity is typically measured using a single,
small-scale metric (‘rugosity’) that comprises of multiple components, each of which
may affect fishes differently and limits our understanding of how fishes associate with
reef structure. Recent developments in photogrammetry offer the potential to efficiently
study reef complexity in greater detail, leading to measures of different aspects of
complexity at multiple spatial scales. Here we assess the use of this technology and
multiple components of complexity to explain the abundance of reef fish when compared against traditional metrics of structural complexity. Three damselfish fish species
were chosen as model species, based on contrasting trophic habits and expected use of
reef structure. 3D reef reconstructions were used to quantify the following complexity
metrics: 1) exposure to predators and competitors (field of view), 2) density of predation
refuges (crevices) and 3) food availability. Overall, these metrics explain the distribution of fish species between 4 and 400-fold better (40-97% of the variance) than the


SOCIAL AND ECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN RESOURCE CONSERVATION:
GEOSPATIAL PRIORITIZATION FOR SUBSISTENCE FISHERY MANAGEMENT IN
SOUTHEAST BRAZIL (Abstract ID: 29546)

125

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

capture food and provide suitable conditions for the aggregation of zooplankton and fish
larvae. These results demonstrate how fishing impacts not only affect the gorgonians
directly removed or damaged, but also impacts the viability of the remaining populations
and their ecological role. Based on experimental results, gorgonians entangled in nets
were collected from fishermen, and transplanted at high density on artificial structures,
which were deployed on the continental shelf in the north of Cap de Creus (Spain) at 85
m depth. Survival of transplanted gorgonians was monitored during one year by means
of a remotely operated vehicle. Zooplankton and sediment samples were also collected
to follow the recovering of the biodiversity and biomass of the associated fauna.

The subsistence extractive reserve (Reserva Extrativista - RESEX) of Arraial do Cabo
is one of Brazil’s first marine extractive reserves, and is setting a precedent for local
resource management efforts in areas of complex stakeholder interests. In order to
achieve objectives of the reserve and establish an effective management plan, there
must be a better understanding of the spatial dynamics of the RESEX area and uses.
Here, we aim to 1) identify areas of high user conflict, 2) identify areas of greater ecological value, and 3) make recommendations for spatial fishing regulations that would cause
the least conflict among stakeholders and conserve marine resources. This integration
of social and ecological information into a Geographical Information System (GIS) is
directly applied to local conservation efforts, and intended to enhance the participatory
management process as well as provide an adaptive tool for future monitoring efforts.
Stakeholder objectives and concerns were gathered from participatory meetings, as was
spatial information on the use of the study area. Ecological data of fish distributions and
benthic community composition were drawn from surveys carried out over the past
two decades. Mapping products contribute to community efforts a better understanding of the spatial reality of stakeholder use and resource distribution. By integrating
local user knowledge and scientific data, we provide a visualized evaluation of priority
management areas within the reserve, instrumental to a resource management plan that
is participatory, adaptive, and effective.


UNDERSTANDING DRIVERS OF HERBIVORE ABUNDANCE TO SUPPORT RESILIENCE-BASED MANAGEMENT IN HAWAII (Abstract ID: 29022 | Poster ID: 714)


For coral reef ecosystems, herbivorous fishes are believed to play a disproportionately
large role in ecosystem processes of coral reefs. For example, by controlling algal
overgrowth, herbivores contribute to reef resiliency to bleaching events. Herbivorous fish
populations are distributed heterogeneously both between and within the Main Hawaiian
Islands. While many herbivorous fish species are targeted by fishermen, human-related
impacts must be considered alongside locally-varying habitat and oceanographic
conditions. We use data on fishing pressure, human population density, oceanographic
conditions and benthic habitat, as well as reef fish monitoring data from multiple sources
to develop a series of hierarchical Bayesian models that explain spatial variation in
herbivore biomass and diversity throughout the state of Hawaii. Results provide a basis
where there is considerable scope for herbivore recovery, and, conversely, where habitat
and oceanographic conditions place a low limit on potential herbivore populations.
Finally, using a range of estimates of potential trajectories in coral cover and habitat
complexity, we estimate how herbivore carrying capacity for Hawaii reefs is likely to
change over coming decades.

THE ROLE OF SEDIMENT CHARACTERISTICS IN HERBIVORY DETERRENCE
ON CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28551)
Elevated inputs of terrestrial sediments are threatening coral reefs around the globe.
These sediment loads contribute to coral reef degradation by reducing the survival of
benthic organisms and by changing reef processes. Specifically, sediment loads in the
epilithic algal matrix (EAM) deter grazing by herbivorous fishes and may compromise
their critical roles on coral reefs. Currently however, the properties of sediments that
drive herbivore deterrence are unknown. To understand how sediments inhibit herbivory,
it is crucial to disentangle the effects of their various chemical, biological and physical
properties. This is particularly important when assessing the specific impacts of terrestrial sediments on inner-shelf reefs. In this presentation I will describe the nature of
benthic sediments on inner-shelf reefs of the Great Barrier Reef (GBR) and will discuss
their influence on grazing by herbivorous fishes. I will present the results of aquarium
based studies which revealed the specific roles of three key sediment attributes: sediment source, grain size and organic load, on grazing by abundant coral reef herbivores.
Our findings illustrate the effects that different sediment characteristics may have on


IMPACTS OF SEQUENTIAL SUPER TYPHOONS ON CORAL REEF COMMUNITIES AND THE CHARACTERIZATION OF THE RECOVERY POTENTIAL OF
CORAL REEFS IN PALAU (Abstract ID: 28569)


Low latitude coral reefs rarely experience typhoons. However, climate change is altering
typhoon trajectories. The low latitude reefs of Palau, Micronesia have been unimpacted
by typhoon damage for 70 years or more. Yet, in 2012 and 2013, the island was impacted
by two successive super-typhoons that catastrophically damaged the eastern outer reefs.
Loss of coral cover was highest on the shallow eastern slopes approaching 60%. The
density of juvenile corals decreased all around the archipelago, even on reefs where
overall coral cover scarcely decreased. These findings suggest a potential stock-recruitment relationship with corals on the damaged eastern reefs. Fish communities were
generally unaltered; except small parrotfish which doubled in density along the eastern
reef slope and inner reefs following the second typhoon. The long-term recovery of
the damaged eastern reefs is unknown. Further research will be conducted throughout
2016 to quantify the recovery potential of Palauan corals reefs, using a combination of
historical monitoring data, current assessment of the reef including coral recruitment
studies, and modeling techniques. The characterization of the recovery process of the
damaged eastern reefs and the drivers that maximize reef recovery will then be adapted
into management options.

ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION OF DEEP CORAL GARDENS ON THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTINENTAL SHELF (Abstract ID: 27838)
Bottom trawling and trammel net fishing are currently causing the removal or damage
of deep-water corals and gorgonians allover the world. Fragmentation and reduction
of population density of these structural benthic species is one of the major threats
for their viability, and may results in a drastic change in the ecological structural and
functional role they play. In this presentation, we show a combination of (1) experimental work under controlled conditions and (2) field research used to perform and evaluate
the effectiveness of the first ecological restoration targeted to recover deep gorgonian
assemblages on the Mediterranean continental shelf. Laboratory experiments showed
that a reduction in gorgonian population density significantly affects their capability to


CORAL GENETIC DIVERSITY AND DISEASE DYNAMICS (Abstract ID: 28528)
Disease outbreaks have decimated reef-building Acroporid corals in the Caribbean.
Recent work has shown that certain Acroporid genotypes appear to be resistant to
disease and may thus promote the recovery of these critical coral populations. However,
resistant genotypes also appear to grow more slowly than susceptible genotypes. Here,
126

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

we use a series of spatially-implicit and spatial-explicit metacommunity models to understand the consequences of this tradeoff between growth and susceptibility on the genetic structure and persistence of coral populations experiencing disease outbreaks. We
the size of disease outbreaks when transmission is high but reduces it when transmission
is low. Disease amplification occurs when high transmission and low virulence allow
the fixation of susceptible but fast-growing genotypes because infected corals occupy
patches for a long time and thus make it harder for resistant but slow-growing genotypes
to colonize empty patches. Conversely, disease dilution occurs when low transmission
and virulence lead to the fixation of resistant but slow-growing genotypes because there
are fewer infected corals and thus more empty patches available for colonization. Overall, these results suggest that understanding these reciprocal feedbacks between coral
genetic diversity and disease are critical for devising effective management strategies to
ensure the persistence of these important ecosystems.


MOLECULAR AND PHYSIOLOGICAL ACCLIMATISATION REQUIRED FOR CORALS TO THRIVE WITHIN SOUTHERLY HIGH LATITUDE REEFS OF EASTERN
AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 29779)
Southern high latitude reefs have been considered as potential coral refugia as oceans
warm, but in the case of coastal urbanised systems requires that corals have a broad
capacity to acclimatise to intense localised anthropogenic pressures. How this can be
realised through “genetic reprogramming” (of the coral microbiome and/or coral host)
versus physiological plasticity is unknown. We examined how corals have both genetically and physiologically acclimatised to thrive within the Sydney harbour area (~34oS);
here, the geographically cosmopolitan Plesiastrea versipora and southerly-restricted
Coscinerea mcneilli form relatively large veneering patch communities towards the
extremes of their distribution in Australia. Populations were examined across three sites
of differing water quality; discrete sampling revealed that Symbiodinium spp. (based on
rDNA, microsatellite flanking, and plastid genes) were highly conserved indicating the
presence of a single species whereas associated 16S rRNA-based bacterial diversity was
highly variable across both host species and with season. Parallel ex situ experiments
replicating seasonal conditions examined any differences in metabolic performance
(photosynthesis, respiration and calcification) that accompanied the microbiome trends.
We show for the first time the molecular and physiological properties required for corals
to push their realised niche to southerly extremes.

HOST FISH ECOLOGY INFLUENCES SYMBIONT POPULATION STRUCTURE
AND SPECIFICITY IN A BIOLUMINESCENT SYMBIOSIS (Abstract ID: 28063)
The coral reef-dwelling cardinalfish, Siphamia tubifer, forms a specific pairwise symbiosis
with the luminous bacterium, Photobacterium mandapamensis, harboring the bacteria in
a light organ attached to the gut. At night, the fish forages near the reef while emitting
bacterial light along its ventrum. The fish returns to a home site at dawn, where it seeks
shelter among the spines of sea urchins and releases excess symbiont cells as waste. To
examine the role of the ecology of the host in structuring populations of its symbiotic
bacteria, we used double-digest restriction site associated sequencing (ddRAD-seq) to
define patterns of genomic structure of both the host and symbiont. Analysis of >10,000
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the host fish across 300 individuals from
11 locations in Okinawa, Japan over 3 years yielded low Fst values and no evidence
of genetic structure at spatial scales ranging from a few to one hundred kilometers. In
contrast, analysis of >600 polymorphic loci in the bacterial genome yielded distinct genetic structure at spatial scales between 40 and 100 kilometers. The lack of population
not recruit to natal reefs. In contrast, the presence of genetic structure in the symbiont
suggests that host larvae acquire their symbiotic bacteria from a locally enriched pool
near a settlement site. The site fidelity and homing behavior of the adult fish therefore
may shape and maintain symbiont specificity over host generations.


FOLLOW THAT FISH: A SUPPLY CHAIN ANALYSIS OF HAWAII’S NEARSHORE
FISHERY (Abstract ID: 30040)
Hawaii’s coral reef fishery is eclipsed in the economy by the pelagic fishery that generates far more economic value and has been better studied. Data gaps, a lax reporting system in which fishers are required to report what they catch but dealers can
voluntarily report what they purchase, backdoor fish sales, and a poor understanding
of the total non-commercial catch complicate efforts to monitor this socially, culturally,
and economically valuable fishery. In this study, we have traced the supply chain of
Hawaii’s nearshore fish species (coral reef and reef-associated species) and assessed the
economic and social value provided by this fishery. We have utilized commercial catch
records for 2009-2013, commercial sales records for the same time period, market price
data, and estimations of non-commercial catch for the main Hawaiian Islands. We found
that nearly half the fish caught by commercial fishers disappears before commercial
sales reports are filed. Non-commercial catch significantly contributes to the supply of
coral reef fish, and when the market value is applied, this catch is worth over $7million
more than reported commercial sales, indicating that non-commercial fishing provides
a significant food expenditure subsidy. The commercial and noncommercial supply provides over 4.3 million meals annually. Coral reef fish are an especially valuable resource
to the state and one that until now has been poorly understood and laxly managed.


OCEAN OASES: NEAR-ISLAND BIOLOGICAL HOTSPOTS IN BARREN OCEAN
BASINS (Abstract ID: 29755)


Phytoplankton production drives marine ecosystem trophic-structure and global fisheries
yields. Phytoplankton biomass is particularly influential near coral reef islands and atolls
that span the oligotrophic tropical oceans. The paradoxical enhancement in phytoplankton near an island-reef ecosystem – Island Mass Effect (IME) – was first documented
60 years ago, yet much remains unknown about the prevalence and drivers of this
ecologically important phenomenon. Here, we provide the first basin-scale investigation
of coral reef ecosystems surveyed, creating near-island “hotspots” of phytoplankton
biomass throughout the upper water-column. Variations in IME strength are governed by
key biogeophysical drivers, namely geomorphic type (islands versus atolls), bathymetric
ocean oases increase nearshore phytoplankton biomass by up to 86% over oceanic
conditions, providing basal energetic resources to higher trophic levels that support
subsistence-based human populations.

CORAL REEF RECOVERY AND REORGANISATION IN THE INDIAN OCEAN
(Abstract ID: 28011)
Coral bleaching in 1998 was particularly severe in the Indian Ocean, where up to 90%
coral cover was lost in some locations. I will talk about the unfolding dynamics from this
disturbance event on Seychelles reefs, from both an ecological and geological perspective,
and the changing structure of these reefs. Around half of the reefs in the inner Seychelles
recovered towards pre-disturbance live coral states by 2014, while the other half
underwent regime shifts to fleshy macroalgae. Functional diversity of associated reef fish
communities shifted substantially following bleaching, returning towards pre-disturbance
structure on recovering reefs, while becoming progressively altered on regime shifting
reefs. These changes are also reflected in food chain lengths of reef meso-predators,


127

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Terrigenous sediment derived from unpaved roads is a significant stressor to coral reefs
in the US Virgin Islands. The 10.7 km2 Coral Bay watershed was the focus of a NOAAARRA watershed restoration program completed in 2011, which included: sediment
retention structures, road drainage improvements, and limited road paving. An ongoing
terrestrial-marine monitoring program to assess the effectiveness of this restoration at
multiple spatiotemporal scales measures: (a) terrestrial erosion and runoff-sediment
yields; (b) marine terrigenous sedimentation at shoreline and coral reef sites; and (c)
the sediment “residence time” using short-lived radioisotopes (SLR). Paving reduced
road-segment-scale erosion rates to 4-29% of pre-paving rates, but watershed modeling
showed that ~90% of the ~110 Mg yr-1 reductions were due to sediment retention
ponds. The high variability of marine terrigenous sedimentation rates due to sediment
resuspension limited the statistical significance of mean pre- vs. post-restoration terrigenous sedimentation rate comparisons. A more promising approach has been to select
sampling periods with roughly equivalent rainfall patterns for pre- vs. post- restoration
comparisons and to use SLR sediment ages and nephelometers to deduce the contributions of contemporary sediment input vs. resuspension to total sediment accumulation.
The Coral Bay watershed restoration and monitoring program may serve as a case study
on how to develop effective management and monitoring strategies that may be applied
to other areas with similar ephemeral hydrologic behavior.

feeding on shorter, simplified chains on degraded reefs. Recovery was favoured when
reefs were structurally complex and in deeper water, when density of juvenile corals and
herbivorous fishes was relatively high and when nutrient loads were low. From a geological perspective, fewer reefs regained a positive carbonate budget following the bleaching
event, with presence of macroalgae, massive corals, wave exposure and parrotfish biomass influencing carbonate budget outcomes. Worryingly, by 2014, few reefs had regained
the attributes that promoted recovery from the 1998 event, rendering them vulnerable to
future disturbance. Marine reserves had little bearing on reef trajectory, and the influence
of this management system on the fish community appears to be changing.

BETTER LIVING THROUGH PHYSICS: MAPPING REEF RESILIENCE WITH SITESPECIFIC ECOLOGICAL FORECASTS FOR CORAL THERMAL STRESS (Abstract
ID: 29628)
Ocean physics can be used to improve the understanding of environmental impacts on
coral reefs, informing decisions to conserve reefs and to sustain coastal economies by
preserving reef ecosystem services. Thermal stress is an ongoing physical threat to reefs,
as witnessed by widespread bleaching-related mortality in 2014 and 2015. Reefs are also
under pressure from other physical and biogeochemical stressors such as land-based pollution, ocean acidification, reduced circulation, and storm damage. Attempts to moderate
the combined effects of these stressors presents a challenging management scenario.
Spatially explicit science - accounting for key local features - can help to focus monitoring,
management, and research for informed decision making. The authors use expert systems
to alert managers to ecological impacts on reefs and fisheries. “Ecoforecasts” rely on
a simple ocean physics model at <100 m resolution, integrating seafloor maps with coarser-resolution data for weather, oceanography, and turbidity. Climate, weather, and human
activity drive many stressors; but at the scale of reefs, oceanography dominates variability
in sea temperature, water mixing and circulation. Seafloor depth and slope prove key in
predicting both sea temperature extremes and cross-reef water exchange, and remotely
sensed turbidity can improve temperature and benthic light predictions. Results show how
data integration, artificial intelligence, and a simple model can improve assessment and
prediction of relative resilience between reef sites within a jurisdiction.


LARVAL DISPERSAL AND MOVEMENT PATTERNS OF CORAL REEF FISHES:
IMPLICATIONS FOR MARINE RESERVE DESIGN (Abstract ID: 27963)
Connectivity is a key ecological factor to consider in marine reserve design to maximise
benefits for fisheries management and biodiversity conservation. For reserves to protect
biodiversity and enhance populations of fisheries species, they must sustain focal species
within their boundaries and be spaced so they can function as mutually replenishing networks while providing recruitment subsidies to fished areas. Thus the configuration (size,
spacing and location) of reserves within a network should be informed by larval dispersal and adult movement patterns. Our review of movement patterns (home ranges,
ontogenetic shifts and spawning migrations) of 34 families (210 species) of coral reef
fishes demonstrates that movement varies among and within species, and is influenced
dispersal distances tend to be <5–15 km and self-recruitment is common. Synthesising
this information has allowed us to provide species, specific advice on marine reserve
configuration where: reserves should be more than twice the size of home ranges of
focal species; reserve spacing should be <15 km; and reserves should include critical
habitats for the life history of focal species, and be spaced to accommodate movement
patterns among these. This information is being used to improve marine reserve design
in coral reef regions worldwide.


CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES OF CORAL REEF MANAGEMENT IN
WEST AND CENTRAL AFRICA (Abstract ID: 28152 | Poster ID: 609)
The Abidjan Convention which is one of UNEP’s regional seas flagship programme
forming cooperative mechanism to promotes cooperation in the protection and development of the marine and coastal environment in the West, Central and Southern African
Region. Pursuant its CoP decision CP 11/6 on Coral Reef Partnership: 1. To urge the
Contracting Parties to consider the importance of preserving coral reefs and the services
they render to ecosystems; 2. To request the Secretariat to develop collaboration with
the Global Partnership on Coral Reefs of UNEP’s Regional Seas Programme and other
institutions, and to set up a working group charged with developing tools and methods
that will allow for better management of coral reefs; 3. To exhort the Contracting Parties
to respect and promote the objectives of sustainable management of the reefs, laid
down in the Implementation Plan of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, in
particular by establishing partnerships with the International Coral Reef Action Network
(ICRAN) ; 4. To invite the Contracting Parties to contribute to the development of a
global network of protected marine areas in order to better preserve the biodiversity
of the coral reefs. Subsequently, two Coral Reef Projects (Sao Tome and Principe, and
Cape Verde) have been identified with national Action Plans developed to support an
effective management of respective Coral Reef projects.


MODELLING THE CIRCULATION OF A SEMI-ENCLOSED ISOLATED CORAL
REEF ATOLL (Abstract ID: 28633)
The hydrodynamics of coral reefs directly influence ecosystem diversity, productivity and community structure. Predicting the processes that drive reef circulation will
facilitate understanding reef resilience when challenged by future climate change. Most
studies on coral atolls have focused on shallow reef tops forced by surface waves,
located primarily within microtidal regions. This study focuses on Scott Reef, an isolated
reef atoll system that rises steeply from depths of 2500 m, ~300 km off northwestern
Australia. The dynamics of North Scott, a shallow (~20m deep), semi-enclosed lagoon
(exchange only through two narrow reef channels), with a spring tidal range of > 3 m,
will be presented. A multidisciplinary research cruise took place during April 2015 to
Scott Reef. To quantify the hydrodynamics of North Scott Lagoon, an array of moored
instruments were deployed, including wave and tide gauges, and current meters/profilers. Field measurements indicate that the shallow reef crest acts to restrict exchange
between the open ocean and the lagoon, resulting in a highly asymmetric tidal flows.


128

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

humans do not have to have a bad effect on the sea but can effect positive change. The
living sculptures merges art and science, help damaged habitats regenerate as well as
creating innovative works of art. Many thought her idea was mad but now the scientists
she works with agree art is powerful and emotive. Our program is fun and could be seen
agreed No Take Zones. Working closely with the community is a vital ingredient for success. We always partner with local NGO’s and help them generate ecotourism attractions
and alternative sources of income. We have inspiring imagery of how life has grown on
the artworks. It is this ever changing, symbiotic relationship with nature that is so special.
In the cyber world the inspiring visuals spread a positive Eco story, one that is a creative,
action-based solution. Over the last 8 years, we have learnt from our success and failures, creating art in the sea presents its challenges! Some people say we should just leave
the sea alone ‘ let it go back to nature’ but is that realistic with billions on the planet?

A numerical model (DFLOW-FM) was developed using flexible mesh gridding to
account for the complex bathymetry of the reef and lagoon, and was able to replicate
the hydrodynamics. Water quality variables will be incorporated into the model, to not
only provide insight into the physical forcing associated with the circulation and flushing
of the lagoon, but also give an indication of the system’s responses to projected future
environmental disturbances.

THE COMBINED EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN TEMPERATURE AND PCO2 ON
PRODUCTION OF DIMETHYLSULPHONIOPROPIONATE IN MASSIVE PORITES


The biogenic sulphur compound dimethylsulphoniopropionate (DMSP) is a putative antioxidant produced by corals and their symbiotic zooxanthellae. DMSP has been shown
to alleviate cellular stress such as that caused by increasing sea surface temperatures and
decreasing oceanic pH (ocean acidification). In this study we acclimated small colonies
of massive Porites corals to three different seawater pCO2 treatments (180ppm, 400ppm
and 750ppm) and two temperature scenarios (25 and 28C) over periods of several
indicate consistent patterns. The net production of DMSP is lower in corals cultured
at 750 ppm seawater pCO2 compared to 400 ppm. Net seawater DMSP production is
net release of DMSP in both the light and dark at both temperatures. But we observed a

USING TIME LAPSE PHOTOMOSAICS TO MONITOR GROWTH AND EXPANSION OF ACROPORA CERVICORNIS THICKETS CREATED BY OUTPLANTING
NURSERY GROWN CORALS (Abstract ID: 29006)
In the last decade, coral nursery operations in the Caribbean have expanded from just a
few locations to over 50 programs around the Caribbean in over 20 different countries.
These programs have proven to be effective at increasing the local populations of Acropora cervicornis where outplanting is conducted. Typical monitoring normally focus on
individual colonies. Frequently, monitoring at the level of an individual colony becomes
more complicated after 1-2 years as corals grow and intertwine, new colonies are
created through fragmentation, tags can be hard to relocate as they are overgrown, etc.
Longer term monitoring goals (3-5 years+) should look at a broader scale considering
the whole community, the overall health of thickets, their size (expansion or reduction),
asexual recruitment and changes in reef community. Photomosaics are a useful tool for
this type of monitoring. The research presented here used photomosaics analyzed with
Coral Point Count with Excel Extensions (CPCE) to monitor the growth and expansion
of thickets that were outplanted at 2 grounding sites. Photomosaics were collected every
6-12 months. Changes in the benthic community were monitored by looking at percent
decreases in the presence of bare substrate were recorded. Several years after initial
outplanting, the outplanted corals have developed into self-sustaining thickets that are
expanding through assexual reproduction and have withstood impacts from multiple
