(RADseq) to analyze genomes of the coral holobiont and identify symbiont clades, and
we will discuss progress in using NGS to characterize symbiont diversity among colonies
with different bleaching phenotypes.

THE STRUCTURE OF FISH ASSEMBLAGES ON RESTORED AND UN-RESTORED
CORAL REEF HABITATS IMPACTED BY SHIP GROUNDINGS (Abstract ID: 29929)
order to evaluate how fish assemblages responded to active coral reef restoration work
at two large ship grounding sites in Guayanilla, Puerto Rico. Restoration of the impacted
coral reef habitat involved out-planting ofAcropora cervicornis from nurseries to restore
areas where the reef topography was flattened. Also emergency restoration was conducted to salvage detached corals, octocorals and sponges to recover lost habitat from
groundings. Data on reef fish density, species diversity and size structure were collected
thickets. The benthic community at each treatment was sampled to evaluate correlations
between the fish assemblage, sessile biota and rugosity. Fish assemblages within restoration sites were more similar to reference sites than un-restored treatments. Acropora
cervicornis restoration sites exhibited a temporal change in fish habitat utilization and
had a higher relative abundance of early juvenile life stages of reef fishes. These results
provide information for understanding the dynamics of reef fish habitat value related to
coral reef restoration efforts.


TEMPERATURE AND SALINITY EFFECTS ON THE ONSET OF SYMBIOSIS
BETWEEN ACROPORA VALIDA AND VARIOUS SUBCLADES OFSYMBIODINIUM
(Abstract ID: 30017)


Larvae of most broadcasting corals do not contain symbionts. They have to establish
symbiosis by uptaking symbionts from the environment. This process is likely to be
affected by environmental factors. To study the possible consequences of global climate
change on coral-algal symbiosis establishment, Acropora valida recruits were exposed to
different temperatures (24, 27, 30 and 32oC), salinities (22, 27 and 32psu) and symbiont
treatments (subclades C1, C15 and D symbionts). The success of symbiosis establishment was recorded in terms of infection percentage and visual ranking on symbiont
with symbiont D showing the highest infection percentage in the first three weeks,
percentage. Recruit mortality was also monitored. D-infected recruits showed no significant difference in mortality from C1-infected recruits under elevated temperatures. Clade
D symbiont has been reported to be less photosynthetically efficient and contributed
to lower growth rate in coral juveniles. So the result of this experiment suggested that
increasing seawater temperature may drive the coral recruits to form symbiosis with less
favorable symbionts and thus affect the growth of the next generations of corals in the
future. This project is supported by RGC-GRF 460013.

APPLICATION OF ACOUSTIC TELEMETRY TO ADVANCE SCIENTIFIC UNDERSTANDING AND INFORM MANAGEMENT OF SPECIES THAT FORM SPAWNING
AGGREGATIONS IN THE US VIRGIN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 29527)
Acoustic telemetry has provided new insights into the movements of aquatic organisms.
Drivers of animal movements can include foraging, reproduction and ontogeny that can
encompass multiple habitats and various spatial scales. Environmental variability is a
fourth driver of movement that has become more important as climate change intensifies.
This paper reports on the dynamic application of acoustic telemetry as an essential tool
Scaridae) and how acute environmental change may modify behavioural patterns.


MORE THAN JUST A PRETTY MANTLE: THE ECOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF
GIANT CLAMS IN CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 28243)

BIODIVERSITY OF GIANT CLAMS (TRIDACNIDAE) IN THE SPERMONDE ARCHIPELAGO, SOUTH SULAWESI, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 29738 | Poster ID: 52)

Giant clams are large and colourful bivalves closely associated with Indo-Pacific coral
reefs. They are thought to play various ecological roles but these have not yet been fully
elucidated. In this study, we show how giant clams are important providers of food and
shelter, and function as reef builders and shapers. Giant clam tissues are attractive to
predators and scavengers, while opportunistic feeders exploit their discharges of live
zooxanthellae, faeces and gametes. The shells of giant clams provide hard substrate for
colonization by epibionts, while various commensal and ectoparasitic organisms live
within their mantle cavities. Populations of giant clams can enhance the topographic relief of reefs, act as reservoirs of zooxanthellae, and potentially counteract eutrophication
via water filtering. Lastly, giant clams can produce large quantities of calcium carbonate
shell material that eventually becomes part of the reef framework. As with many benthic
species, giant clams are facing pressures of overfishing and habitat loss, resulting in
extirpations that are likely to affect coral reefs negatively. Identifying the ecological roles
of giant clams is an important step in strengthening the case for their conservation.

Wild population of clams under family of Tridacnidae has been declined and even gone
to extinct in some areas of Indonesian water. For that reason, there is a strong need to
determine its current condition in the Spermonde Archipelago. The study was conducted
on 11 islands that represent three zones of Spermonde Archipelago using Belt Transect
method. The results are presented descriptively in the form of tables, figures and graphs.
There are four species of clams (Tridacnidae) found in the research area, namely
density was found on the island of Lumu-Lumu, Barrang Lompo, and Bone Tambung
cm, while the phase of juvenile shell size 1-3 cm and 11 cm in the population were found
size 1-3 cm is rarely found. This implies that the rate of recruitment and reproduction
population in the wild.


246

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

DISEASE ECOLOGY AND TRANSMISSION PATTERN: A CASE STUDY OF
BROWN BAND AND BLACK BAND DISEASE ON THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
(Abstract ID: 28021)
Managing diseases in nature requires understanding how pathogens are transmitted
among hosts. We summarise field and aquarium studies aimed at understanding transmission patterns and vectors of black band disease (BBD)and brown band disease (BrB),
two coral diseases on the Great Barrier Reef. In aquarium studies testing the vector
potential of two corallivores, the butterflyfish Chaetodon plebeius and the snail Drupella sp,
we found that chaetodontids did not transmit either disease, even when fish fed directly
on both infected and healthy nubbins for extended periods of time. In contrast,Drupella
transmitted BrB to healthy corals in 40% of cases; however, the snail was unable to
BrB lesions, we found no evidence that removal of pathogens by butterflyfish decreased
disease progression rates. These results demonstrate that fish are unlikely to influence
the dynamics of these diseases, either by slowing disease progression rates or by increasing pathogen transmission among corals. Drupella snails however, have the potential to
temporal patterns in the spatial distributions of BBD and BrB confirmed that both diseases behaved as infectious diseases, clustering in restricted areas of the available space.
Collectively these results indicate that pathogens are transmitted from a source colony to
adjacent hosts, possibly with the help of vectors such as Drupella snails.

DIVERSITY OF GORGONIANS AND GAMETE DEVELOPMENT OF GORGONIAN,
DICHOTELLA GEMMACEA IN THE UPPER GULF OF THAILAND (Abstract ID:
29681 | Poster ID: 53)
Gorgonian is one of the most abundant organisms, and has an important role in coral
reef ecosystem. In this study, the diversity of gorgonians at Laem Pu Chao, Amphoe Sattahip, Chon Buri Province in the upper Gulf of Thailand was investigated. In addition, the
gamete development of Dichotella gemmacea was observed. The results showed that a
Junceella, Melithaea, Menella, Rumphella, and Subergorgia were found in the area. From
the field observations, the gametes of Dichotella gemmacea in all stages were found year
around. However, high maturity stages were recorded from August to September.
Zulfikar, -., Universitas Malikussaleh, Indonesia


SURVIVABILITY OF JUVENILE CORAL IN THE VICINITY OF A SHALLOW WATER THERMAL VENT (Abstract ID: 28989 | Poster ID: 375)

LEPTASTREA PURPUREA: A POSSIBLE MODEL ORGANISM FOR CORAL REPRODUCTION AND PHYSIOLOGY (Abstract ID: 28762 | Poster ID: 173)

Ocean acidification is a decrease in pH and carbonate ion concentration of the seawater
as a response to rising atmospheric carbon dioxide, which expected to have a negative
effect on the reef-building corals and calcifying marine organisms. Thus, we evaluated
the growth characteristic of juvenile corals in the naturally acidified water of a thermal
vent at Pulau Weh, Indonesia. The dominant juvenile corals that were selected for observation were from the genera Acropora, Pocillopora and Porites. The field survey showed
a general decrease in the growth and skeletal structure along a decreasing pH gradient,
whereby significant effect were observed among juvenile corals that were exposed to
pH value 7.7. Growth rate of juvenile corals decreased 20-40% over the study period
at the lowered pH condition compared to control condition. The study suggests that
juvenile corals at acidified water record a slower growth and a porous skeletal structure.
However both field and laboratory experiments will provide a better insight on the
susceptibility of coral facing the changing climate particularly ocean acidification.

Sexually produced larvae are used in various fields of coral research. Because the vast
majority of scleractinians reproduces only once or a few times a year and an ex-situ
spawning induction is still very hard to achieve, obtaining planula larvae is still very labor
intensive. Larvae of brooding corals can be used but are oftentimes clonal and differ
such as Aiptasia spp. have been substituting scleractinians as model organisms in coral
research. Admittedly, the transferability of conclusions obtained from these species can
be questionable. This study examines the potential of Leptastrea purpurea as a reliable
faviid coral that occurs from the Red Sea to Easter Island. It is common on reef flats and
can also be found in depths of up to 30 m. Larval output throughout the year as well a1s
settlement behavior of planulae was investigated with corals from Guam. Our results
progress in many fields of coral research.


A RESEARCH FRAMEWORK FOR RESOLVING NICHE DIFFERENTIATION AND
SPECIALISATION IN SYMBIODINIUM (Abstract ID: 28879)
The genus Symbiodinium comprises a group of free-living marine dinoflagellate species that have radiated extensively into an endosymbiotic niche. Symbiodinium act as
corals’ ‘solar cells’ and ultimately supply a significant portion of all energy used in the
formation of tropical reef ecosystems. Vast genetic diversity, heterogeneous populations
and endolith formation) make Symbiodinium exceptionally difficult to study and hence
coral-Symbiodinium life history dynamics are not currently considered within models
of reef-health. Using previously unpublished data of Symbiodinium biology, including:
genome size estimation; cell viability ex hospite; interaction with microhabitats as freeliving cells; and identification of key traits unique to cryptic stages of the life history; we
propose a framework critically needed to expand perception of Symbiodinium functional
transiently free-living, concurrently free-living, or exclusively free-living), thus providing
context for specialisation in symbiosis, or alternatively, selection pressures that promote
alternative, ex hospite niches of Symbiodinium cells via their free-living phase. Detecting
where Symbiodinium lineages are positioned on these evolutionary pathways is ultimately
needed to attain a system-wide epidemiology for reefs facing climate change and will
isolate ‘best candidates’ for assisted evolution and reef restoration-based management.


LESSON ON HOW TO INITIATE MARINE MANAGE AREA (MMA) WITH LOCAL
RESOURCES (Abstract ID: 28672 | Poster ID: 679)
Buleleng Regency is working on establishing an MMA network of 14,000 ha. The network was design to include already established local MMAs : Pemuteran, Les, Bondalem,
Tejakula, Penuktukan villages. Local stakeholders that have specific interest on conservation led the initial development of the MMAs: the tourism sector in Pemuteran, and
fishing communities in other villages, in partnership with NGOs. It is important to note
that the MMAs were initiated under significant resource support from the communities.
The NGOs mainly focused on structuring the community’s work, building collaboration
within them, and bridging them to strategic partners. The NGOs also connect themself
to share program and resources. Buleleng government has been embracing the effort
consistently over time with policy support, financial resources, and dedicated staffs. They
actively involved MMA’s community management bodies in the process. This builds a
significant leverage to the conservation. Interests from community are increasing, more
partners are connected and supports are rising. Third party funding for Tejakula were
US0$ in 2008. In 2009, it raised to US$39,917. In 2016, at least 8 NGOs are partnering
with government and local community to support the MMA network development.
Buleleng has shown that to develop an MMA, we can rely on local resources. This is not
only economically efficient, but also create independency. Thus, it gives a higher assurance of a development of a strong and sustainable adaptive co management system.


DIVERSITY AND EXTREMELY HIGH ABUNDANCE OF PICOCYANOBACTERIA IN
THE TROPICAL LAGOON WATERS OF TONGA (Abstract ID: 29963 | Poster ID: 49)
Flow cytometry enumeration method and high-throughput bar-coded pyrosequencing technique for 16S-23S internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences were applied to
elucidate spatial changes of picocyanobacterial abundance and diversity in the near
247

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

coastal tropical waters of Tonga in November 2013. The samples were collected from
57 stations around Tongatapu Island, main island of Tonga. In most stations, Synechococcuswas the most abundant picophytoplankton, ranging widely from 0.03 to 150.2 x 104
7.2 x 104cells ⁄ ml. The extremely high Synechococcusabundances over 106cells ⁄ ml at the
upper bay around Fanga’uta Lagoon indicated that there is huge nutrient input from rural
and agricultural area to support the high phytoplankton biomass. In addition, dominance
ofSynechococcusclades II, III and VIII in this area suggested that they also actively grow
in high nutrient conditions as well, despite clades II and III were known to be dominant
in relatively oligotrophic coastal waters. However, in most lagoon waters, Prochlorococcus
was not detected due to the oligotrophic nature of Prochlorococcus. These results suggested that habitat characteristics of the tropical lagoon drive variability in picocyanobacterial diversity. Such tropical lagoon environment might provide an appropriate
location for carrying out studies on ecological niche of picocyanobacterial ecotypes.

THE HERBIVORE-ALGAE-CORAL INTERACTION AND RESILIENCE OF CORAL
REEFS: DIADEMA FACILITATE REEF RECOVERY IN TAIWAN (Abstract ID: 27977
| Poster ID: 669)
The current status (2012–2014) of three key functional groups (corals, herbivores, macroalgae) was examined at three representative coral reefs (Kenting, Lanyu, Lyuado) in Taiwan.
Results highlighted strikingly low densities of both herbivorous fishes and herbivorous
gastropods at all of the coral reefs, suggesting their loss of function as herbivores. Instead,
sea urchin, Diadema spp. now became the key herbivore in the coral reefs, enhancing coral
juvenile density, and hence coral resilience in the Taiwanese coral reefs. No correlation was
observed between macro-algal covers and coral juvenile densities, suggesting that it would
be not macro-algae but smaller algae (turf algae) that negatively affect the coral resilience in
the Taiwanese coral reefs. Given the abundance and the impact of Diadema, the Diadema
herbivory should be proactively incorporated into management planning of coral reefs in
Taiwan. In parallel, revival of functional redundancy in herbivores would be urgently needed
in order not to repeat the same tragedy happened in the Caribbean, causing the regional
decline of coral reefs by the mass mortality of the then dominant herbivore Diadema.



ARAGONITE SATURATION IN A FRINGING REEF IS STRONGLY INFLUENCED
ID: 378)
Ocean acidification studies indicate that aragonite saturation (Ωar) will decrease with
potential negative effects on reef ecosystems. Reef morphology controls the residence
time of seawater, allowing physical or biological control over CO2-system. We test if the
CO2-system in a fringing reef is controlled by ocean conditions. Monthly discrete samples were collected from September 2012 to August 2013, pH and dissolved inorganic
carbon were used to calculate Ωar. A SeapHOx sensor was deployed in November 2013
to June 2014, at 15m depth and 30min sampling rate. pH was calibrated with discrete
samples. This reef has direct communication with ocean, so discrete sampling showed
that advection controlled the CO2-system, with presence of Gulf of California Water
(GCW,Ωar=2.8±0.1) during winter and Tropical Surface Water (TSW,Ωar=3.2±0.3)the
rest of the year. Optimal conditions for coral calcification occur in summer, with 0.5 Ωar
between seasons. Sensor data showed a similar seasonal pattern plus the California Current Water, were water-mass intrusions corresponded to oceanic processes. TSW-GCW
transition caused a 0.54Ωar decrease. Seasonal presence of water masses indicate a
strong oceanic influence, and along with tidal forcing, not allowed to detect dissolutioncalcification signals. Our results suggest that: a) fringing reefs might suffer the effects of
acidification compared with barrier reefs which modify seawater; b) coral communities
in fringing reefs are adapted to a variable Ωar, so it is feasible that predictions of decreasing pH have no direct effect on calcification.

CONTRASTING EFFECTS OF BENTHIC ALGAE ON THE CORAL MICROENVIRONMENT (Abstract ID: 29312)
Although a shift from coral to algal dominance has been documented on reefs around
the world, the consequence of such transition for the coral microenvironment is poorly
understood. We characterised the oxygen microenvironment at interaction zones
between the massive coral Porites and different benthic functional groups using microsensors in a flow cell chamber and compared our results with observed interactions in
the field in Moorea, French Polynesia. Turf algae, macroalgae and cyanobacteria were
successful competitors against Porites. Their interaction zones exhibited a thick diffusive
boundary layer (DBL) and large diel oxygen fluctuations, with anoxic or close to anoxic
conditions at night. In contrast, Porites competed better against crustose coralline
algae and conspecifics. Their interaction zones had a thin DBL and low diel oxygen
fluctuations, with less reduced oxygen concentrations at night. Experiments with turf
algae showed that the anoxia at the interaction zone during the night was suppressed by
antibiotics, demonstrating that it is mediated by microbes. In addition, DBL thickness
at the interaction zone decreased with increasing flow and when Porites was upstream
of algae. Our data suggest that shifts towards algal dominance, particularly turf algae,
macroalgae and cyanobacteria, create microenvironments which favor the accumulation
of harmful metabolites and microbes at the interaction zones between corals and algae,
potentially causing coral loss. These effects will be mediated by flow speed and direction.



THE NEURAL CIRCUITRY OF PAIR BONDING IN A COMMON BUTTERFLYFISH,
CHAETODON LUNULATUS (Abstract ID: 27772 | Poster ID: 505)

TEMPORAL DISTRIBUTION ANALYSIS OF PARROTFISH AND SURGEONFISH IN
“PARQUE NACIONAL ARRECIFES DE COZUMEL” MEXICO (Abstract ID: 29815 |
Poster ID: 228)

While the adaptive significance of coral reef fish social systems is well explored, little is
known about their neural basis. Here, we investigated the neurobiology of pair bonding
in the monogamous butterflyfish, Chaetodon lunulatus. We focused on four neurochemical-receptor systems involved in mammalian pair bonding, including the oxytocin-like
receptor, isotocin (ITR); arginine vasotocin V1a receptor (V1aR), dopamine D1 and
D2 receptors (D1R, D2R); and the mu-opioid receptor (MOR). To functionally test the
involvement of these receptors in promoting pair bonding, we treated paired males with
receptor antagonists, which blocked pair bonding behavior. To then examine what brain
regions might be involved in this effect, we compared gene expression of these receptors
within brain regions between paired and solitary individuals. We found that pair bonding
was associated with higher ITR and V1aR gene expression within the Vv/Vl in females
but not males, and lower D1R, D2R, and MOR gene expression within several regions
that mediates social and reward behavior, including the Dm, Dl, Vs, POA, Vc, and TPp, in
both sexes. Our results generate insight into the neural circuitry of teleost pair bonding.
More broadly, they show that the neural chemical and anatomical components of butterflyfish pair bonding appear similar to those of mammals, suggesting that the convergent
evolution of vertebrate pair bonding has relied on repeatedly co-opting an ancient neural
circuitry established in early vertebrates.

Parrotfish and surgeonfish are two of the largest and most conspicuous families of herbivorous fish in the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System (MBRS). They are a key component in
structuring the benthic communities of coral reefs, mainly controlling the algae overgrowth.
We evaluated the herbivorous fish assemblage, coral and algae (turf and macroalgae) cover
in six fringing coral reef systems in the “Parque Nacional Arrecifes de Cozumel” (PNAC)
along 30 m transects at depths of 10 to 15 m, from 2005 to 2011. The relative abundance
of fish was variable among reefs and between years: surgeonfish decreased considerably
(67%),parrotfish also decreased (50%). The dominant species of herbivorous fish in all reefs
of the PNAC wereAcanthurus coeruleus, Sparisoma viride and Sparisoma aurofrenatum. The
results also showed that through years the cover of coral and algae were inversely proportional in nearly all reefs. There is a positive relationship between the most dominant species
of herbivores in the presence of algae. Macroalgae and turf algae increased significantly per
reef, while coral cover decreased significantly among years. A proportion of variations per
reef in relative abundance of herbivores, coral and algae cover suggest that every reef has a
unique biological (coral-benthic algae-herbivorous fish) assemblage. There is evidence that
the temporal distribution of parrotfish and surgeonfish among years, affect the coral and
benthic algae cover per reef in this period of time.
248

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


thermal shock. We identified 2,137 protein clusters in Aiptasia, 136 of which were
differentially abundant between treatments. There were minimal differences in protein
abundances between the control and acclimated high-temperature treatments, indicating
that thermal acclimation in symbiotic cnidarians is not primarily regulated at the level of
protein expression. Heat shock resulted in significant changes in the abundance of 104
proteins, including those involved in protein folding and synthesis, redox homeostasis,
and central metabolism. Highly abundant cytoskeletal and structural proteins showed
particularly reduced abundance, demonstrating proteostasis disruption and inhibition
of protein synthesis. Heat shock induced multiple mechanisms for stabilizing, degrading
and preventing the aggregation of proteins, indicative of endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Antioxidant mechanisms and enzymes necessary for redox homeostasis were also
upregulated. The effects of thermal shock were most clearly seen at the endoplasmic
reticulum, and proteostasis maintenance and protein turnover mechanisms may be essential to cnidarian resistance to thermal shock.

‘STAYIN’ ALIVE’: MICROBIOME PATTERNS AND PLAYERS RELATED TO CORAL
(HAWAI’I) (Abstract ID: 29574)
Coral reefs harbor amazing diversity at the macroscopic, microbial, and molecular
scale. Coral holobionts generating this richness associate with rich, functionally dynamic
microbiomes. Most biochemical diversity resides in microbes, which may engage in symbioses with metazoans, thereby expanding hosts’ adaptation capabilities. Symbiodinium
dinoflagellate symbionts are for instance crucial as providing metabolic sustenance for
corals. Other close associates such as prokaryotes and fungi are less studied, yet are also
believed to be vital partners that underpin ecological competence. Under environmental
stress, symbioses become highly sensitive, in particular to elevated temperatures, causing
corals to bleach, debilitate and eventually die. In the summer of 2014, ~80% of the reefs
in Kaneohe Bay paled, representing one of the most intense bleaching events in Hawai’i
since 1940. We used next-generation sequencing to track over 6 months the communities of Symbiodinium, fungi, and bacteria in bleached and resistant coral colonies in the
field following this devastating episode. Worldwide, reefs are threatened by a warming
climate, but the resilience of some colonies after successive bleaching suggests acclimatization, probably involving shifts in coral-associated microbiomes. Corals ability
to alter their symbiotic communities in response to external impacts can be passed to
subsequent generations, and this might be key in the process of adaptation to a changing
world. These data contribute knowledge on the microbial composition that may infer
environmental tolerance in corals.


LATITUDINAL DIVERSITY GRADIENTS OF MULTIPLE TAXA IN REEF COMMUNITIES OF SOUTHERN JAPAN (Abstract ID: 28675)
Latitudinal gradients of species diversity are widely recognized among both terrestrial
and marine ecosystems. Understanding species assembly dynamics at the boundaries
of climate zones is an important theme of biogeography. In this study, we used visual
census data to quantify organisms in reef communities at 19 sites along the Pacific coast
and abundance of multiple epifaunal taxa, such as fishes, echinoderms, octocorals, mollusks and macroalgae, and analyzed the influence of environmental factors and species
traits using generalized linear models. We assigned life history traits to species that are
available from literature. Different taxonomic groups showed different dynamics along
the latitudinal gradient. Species richness and abundance of fishes increased towards low
latitudes. Macroalgae clearly showed the opposite pattern, peaking at high latitudes. Species richness and abundance of other invertebrate groups were highest at intermediate
latitudes and lower in coral reef areas. Additionally, in some taxa, communities changed
with respect to their trait composition along latitudes. For example, fish communities had
a longer mean pelagic larval stage with higher latitudes. Algal communities had more
fleshy and large-bodied species at higher latitudes, and more encrusting calcareous algae
species in the tropics. These results serve to explain and anticipate changes in community
structure and biodiversity as a result of environmental change, such as global warming.


CORAL RECORDS OF SEDIMENTATION AND ITS IMPACTS TO CORAL REEFS IN
THE EASTERN MALACCA STRAIT (Abstract ID: 29090 | Poster ID: 434)
The Strait of Singapore situated on the southern end of the Malacca Strait is a one of
the world’s busiest shipping ports that has been experiencing significant dredging and
reclamation activities since its independence in 1960s. These activities along with high
runoff from a number of rivers have increased sedimentation pressure on coral reefs
environment in this narrow strait of importance to reef connectivity in the region. Here,
we present coral-based histories of sediment loading (via measurement of coral Ba/
Ca), salinity (via coral-derived oxygen isotopic composition of seawater or d18Osw)
and a coral metabolism (via carbon isotopic composition or d13C). These records are
accompanied with a 1.5 yr-long monthly seawater Ba, d18Osw and salinity in order to
understand their relationships on seasonal timescales. Ongoing analysis of rare earth
elements may also be presented herein. Our data shows a steady increase in coral Ba/
Ca as a proxy for sediment loading since 1960s with episodes of high Ba/Ca, which
are in line with reclamation and other environmental events such as river clean up of
the main island. Some of these high Ba/Ca episodes also coincide with higher heavy
metal Pb reported in our previous work (Lee et al., 2014). Along with these coral-based
environmental records, our data reveals a shift towards depleted coral d13O values
suggesting a change toward heterotrophy in coral. Overall, our study shows the utility of
coral skeletal geochemistry to provide environmental histories such as sedimentation as
well as to infer its impacts of coral reefs.


INVESTING IN CAPITAL – CONVERGING ON A DECISION-SUPPORT APPROACH
FOR RESOURCE-POOR AND RESOURCE-RICH CONTEXTS (Abstract ID: 29635)
In increasingly populated tropical coastal regions, achieving the “triple bottom line” of
sustainable development requires making complex decisions to balance economic, social
and environmental needs and limitations. True sustainability occupies the sweet spot
between these three domains. This paper merges concepts from the Capitals Approach
and Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) to help deal with the problems of system complexity,
mixed objectives and uncertainty, providing tools to concretize a stewardship approach.
The challenge is to support decision-making that delivers positive change (growth in
one or more capitals) and prevents negative change (decrease in one or more capitals).
Nature, society and economy can be viewed as capitals, requiring decisions that reject options that result in loss in any capital, and select those that grow capital(s). In MSP, nature,
society and economy define the system to be managed; information is needed on multiple aspects of all three, and a supportive governance context is necessary to facilitate
decision-making. The Capitals Approach can also view information and governance as
capitals to be invested in, rather than degraded. This simple construct can be implemented at a basic level such as in a scorecard approach, with multiple indicators across all the
capitals, and their interactions, in a spatial planning context. All indicators need to be improved, not undermined. At higher levels, complex datasets and models can be integrated
to identify solutions that increase capital, to guide decision-making across scales.



THERMAL SHOCK INDUCES HOST PROTEOSTASIS DISRUPTION AND ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM STRESS IN THE MODEL CNIDARIANAIPTASIA (Abstract
ID: 29323 | Poster ID: 20)

REVIEW OF CORAL CLASSIFICATION STATUS: A CASE STUDY OF KIUNGA
MARINE NATIONAL RESERVE, NORTH COAST KENYA (Abstract ID: 29461 |
Poster ID: 623)

Coral bleaching has devastating effects on coral survival and reef function, but many of
the fundamental cellular effects of thermal stress on cnidarian physiology are unclear.
We used label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to assess the
effects of thermal stress on the proteome of the model Aiptasia sp. Anemones were
allowed to acclimate to elevated temperatures for two weeks or exposed to short-term

Coral classification is a dynamic science which requires regular updates on the species
name changes, distribution, threats of extinction and the methods used to detect these
changes. Use of a single method of classification either morphological or genetic is not

249

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

sufficient to confirm the changes. A review of coral classification for the Kiunga Marine
National Reserve (KMNR) in north coast Kenya was conducted during January to
August last year to ascertain the current status and assess the coverage on phylogenetic
literature; IUCN Red List status and reference to threats facing the species which are
locally or elsewhere. Results from this study showed that corals from Kiunga Marine
National Park were well covered in all aspects of phylogenetic literature with more than
three quarters making it possible to adequately group them to their IUCN Red list categories. However, the analysis detected a group of species which had not been assigned
into any status on the IUCN Red list classification, representing less than a quarter. With
data and information on such omissions, the species could be faced with several threats
hence the need to conduct further studies and analysis focusing on acquiring comprehensive data and information for clear establishment of updated status of the taxonomy
of corals so as to correctly label them in the groups. This opens up an opportunity to
widen the criteria used when assigning the protection and management level of the coral
reef ecosystem in Kenya. Key words: morphological classification, genetic classification,
IUCN Red list categories,corals

EVALUATION OF ACROPORA CERVICORNIS PRODUCTION TECHNIQUES IN
AN OCEAN-BASED NURSERY WITH CONSIDERATION OF CORAL GENOTYPE
(Abstract ID: 27927 | Poster ID: 483)
Staghorn coral Acropora cervicornis is widely cultured for active reef restoration using a
an offshore nursery in the Florida Keys. Our objective was to examine benthic-attached
(block) versus suspended (tree) growout methods and the effect of coral genotype within
and between growout methods. In December 2014, 240 5-cm, non-branching apical fragments were collected from established colonies of four genotypes. For the block method,
10 fragments were affixed to each of 12 cinderblocks (3 cinderblocks per genotype).
Three tree structures each had 40 fragments from all four genotypes (10 fragments per
genotype) randomly assigned to locations across five depths. Temperature was logged
hourly and colony condition was observed monthly. Total linear extension of each colony
was also measured monthly until November 2015, when only three colonies had survived
an extreme bleaching event that began in August. Statistical comparison indicated that
colonies grown on blocks bleached sooner but survived longer than those on trees. Comparisons of growout method were made on pre-bleaching data to exclude confounding
effects of this stress event. Colonies on trees grew significantly faster than those on blocks
but location on trees did not affect growth. Genotype had a significant effect on colony
growth which was determined to be consistent across growout methods by post-hoc analysis. These findings should be of use for coral nursery managers throughout the Caribbean.


DIAGNOSING CORAL DISEASE WITH METABOLOMIC MARKERS (Abstract ID:
29430 | Poster ID: 99)


Investigation of coral disease etiology requires multidisciplinary approaches including
in-depth molecular analyses. Here, we applied untargeted metabolomics to characterize white syndrome coral disease in the Persian/Arabian Gulf. The Gulf is one of the
most extreme environments in which corals occur with high and variable temperatures
(23-35°C) and elevated salinity (38-43 PSU). Recent lethality in the branching coral,
Acropora, has been caused primarily by a white syndrome disease. We observed tagged
Acropora colonies in the Gulf over two years and found that a surprising 63 % of the
monitored colonies were visibly infected by white syndrome during summer months.
Interestingly, only 5 % of tagged colonies were affected by bleaching during the same
period. The syndrome is characterized by fast spreading lesions, which ceased when
water temperatures decreased but reappeared on the same colonies in the following summer. To investigate the impact and cause for the disease we apply untargeted
ultra-high performance liquid chromatography combined with mass spectrometry from
segments of diseased and healthy coral nubbins. Metabolomic profiles show significant
differences between infected and healthy parts of the colony. We describe the metabolic
pathways impacted by the disease using cross-correlation and comparison with metabolomics databases. Our findings show that untargeted metabolomics is a valuable tool for
the investigation of the diseased coral holobiont and improving diagnosis and potential
pathogen identification.

DEVELOPMENT OF A DEVICE FOR IN SITU COLLECTING, REARING, AND
SEEDING CORAL LARVAE (Abstract ID: 28579)
Generally, a shortage of larval supply has been thought a major factor causing delayed
coral recovery. In fact, coral eggs and larvae have been found to easily flow out to the
outside lagoon among degraded reefs around Okinotorishima, an isolated oceanic island
of Japan. Thus, Japan Fisheries Agency developed a device that enables both the in
situ seeding and mass culture of coral larvae (hereafter, the device), to promote coral
reproduction inside the lagoon. Although this idea had been suggested previously, few
studies have addressed the design of such a device at a practical level. We conducted a
basic examination for the device’s functions using the lattice plate, which enhances the
initial survival rate of juvenile corals in Ishigakijima of Okinawa. We also demonstrated
the device’s durability and effectiveness in Okinotorishima, an isolated oceanic island.
We show below the abridged results. a. Appropriate mesh size of the net material of the
device: we compared mesh size of the net, an important factor for enhancing survival
rate of the enclosed larvae, from 30 to 250 μm. The 30 μm mesh size showed the highest
survival rate. b. Quantity of larval collecting and rearing: We assessed the rearing capacity of the device. The maximum number of larvae was 3 million at 4d-old, which they
can settle. c. Monitoring the survival of the juvenile corals: We confirmed that the settled
corals on lattice plate survived until 18 mo after settlement. d. Demonstration tests in
Okinotorishima: We could install the device in Okinotorishima of severe maritime conditions during 7 days.


PROVIDING ACCESS TO A DISTRIBUTED NETWORK OF RESOURCES: NOAA’S
CORAL REEF INFORMATION SYSTEM (Abstract ID: 28768)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA’s) web-enabled Coral
Reef Information System (CoRIS) contains over 10,500 catalog entries for coral related
data and publications covering a wide variety of topics including: coral reef mapping,
monitoring and assessment; natural and socioeconomic research and modeling; outreach and education; and management and stewardship produced through the NOAA
Coral Reef Conservation Program (CRCP) and other coral reef projects. Data and
Through the use of a variety of web services, CoRIS links these systems together to
provide a unified single access point for the public to access the organization’s coral
ecosystem data and publication holdings. The CoRIS catalog is also exposed through
a catalog service endpoint to allow developers to access our catalog holdings without
having to go through a predefined user interface. CoRIS provides users with various
search options to access materials including spatial, temporal, and topical searches.
In addition, project pages are used to highlight, promote, and group materials by topic
and/or jurisdiction. Finally, the CoRIS Glossary and Acronym list, defines thousands of
terms, acronyms, and abbreviations used in coral reef science and management. With
over 1.5 million visitor sessions per year we are reaching a wide audience of educators,
managers, and scientists interested in coral reef ecosystems. You can begin your search


MOLECULAR PHYLOGENETIC STUDY OF MUSHROOM CORALS (SCLERACTINIA: FUNGIIDAE) IN THE RYUKYU ARCHIPELAGO, JAPAN (Abstract ID: 28323
| Poster ID: 76)
The family Fungiidae is a member of the reef corals and lives in the tropical and subtropical Indo-Pacific regions. The taxonomy of the family has been recently revised using
morpho-molecularly analysis (Gittenberger et al. 2011, Benzoni et al. 2012); the family
currently consists of 15 genera and 53 species. The phylogenetic positions of some
fungiid species, however, remain unanalyzed. For example, although 36 fungiid species
have been reported from Japanese waters (Nishihira and Veron 1995), no phylogenetic
250

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

using science-driven approaches, and can be at risk due to local and global threats. By
addressing local threats, managers can make ecosystems more resilient to global threats
such as climate change. To promote managers ability to recognize and address threats,
we developed a pilot program in adaptive management for Kenyan national marine
protected areas. Adaptive resource management is an iterative decision making approach where management strategies are continually reviewed and adjusted in response
to the best available information. At program inception, we found little management
understanding of MPA status or progress toward ecological or social goals. This limited
knowledge inhibiting staff ability to determine appropriate management actions. We discuss steps taken to engage MPA staff in adaptive management including establishment
of measurable objectives, developing a data collection and evaluation system, and the
use of decision-making support tools. We show how the approach transformed thinking
at numerous operational levels within an agency – from stakeholders and entry-level
MPA staff to the national agency executive committee. Finally, we demonstrate how
the stakeholder-manager-researcher partnership resulted in new and creative pathways
toward sustainability, including better ongoing planning to achieve both ecological and
socio-economic goals.

studies have been conducted yet. The present study aims to clarify the phylogenetic
relationships of fungiid species inhabiting around Ryukyu archipelago (84 specimens of
12 genera, 28 species), together with published DNA sequences (Gittenberger et al. 2011,
Benzoni et al. 2012). Their species identification was performed based on the taxonomic
reference (Hoeksema 1989). Material examined includes Cycloseris hexagonalis and
attached-type of Fungia fungites that have never been analyzed molecularly yet. As a
result of molecular phylogenetic analyses of two markers (mitochondrial cytochrome
hexagonalis formed an independent clade, which is clearly distant from the clades with all
other congers as well as other fungiid genera. Moreover, attached and free-living types
positions of these species need to be reviewed with detailed morphological analyses.

HISTORICAL ANALYSIS OF OCEANOGRAPHIC CONNECTIVITY IN THE PULLEY RIDGE (Abstract ID: 29482)


Pulley Ridge is a mesophotic 60-m-deep reef system located 66-km west of the Dry
Tortugas. Far from the coast and surface, it is not affected by coastal pollution and/
or bleaching from water temperature fluctuations. Many of the species living at Pulley
Ridge are also found in shallower water, and they may be connected. Studying the
oceanographic conditions in the region can help determine the extent to which the corals, sponges, and reef fishes living at Pulley Ridge are related to the shallower coral reef
ecosystems of the Dry Tortugas and the Florida Keys, and other regions in the west Florida shelf. Here we consider historical surface drifting buoy trajectory data. More than 150
drifters are found to visit the Pulley Ridge area since 1996. A statistics of arrival times to
potential settlement sites is constructed. This is compared with that of settlement times
of regional species reported in the literature. Potential mean connecting pathways are
deduced and the implications of their spatiotemporal variability are discussed.

CAN SELF-ARMOURING ISLANDS RESIST CLIMATE CHANGE? (Abstract ID:
28045 | Poster ID: 396)
Reef islands (RI) are low lying landforms that are constructed from unconsolidated
carbonate sands and gravels that sit atop reef platforms, and have a limited areal extent.
Because of the above-mentioned attributes it is often presumed that RI’s are sensitive to
rising sea levels and/or increased cyclone intensity and frequency. However, there are
a number of geomorphic/geochemical processes, including (1) cementation of beach
sand to indurated beach rock, and (2) the formation of elevated boulder beaches through
the fracturing and transport of beach rock during cyclonic events, that when combined
Examples of this armouring process are observed on the ~145 RI’s that stretch along
Australia’s NW Pilbara coast, a region that experiences the greatest cyclone intensity/
frequency in Australia. Almost all Pilbara RI’s are constructed from carbonate sand and
have a median island area of ~7 hectares. But unlike Pacific and Indian Ocean RI’s that
typically have land elevations of < 3 m, Pilbara RI’s have elevations that range from 8 to
15 m above mean sea level (MSL). Beachrock is a ubiquitous feature on most islands, but
equally common are imbricated boulder beach deposits, which rise to elevations of 4.5
m above MSL level. These boulder beaches are both formed by and provide protection
from high-energy cyclonic events, and along with beachrock create a natural seawall that
could provide long-term geomorphic stability and increase the resilience of these islands
to climate change.



QUANTIFYING THE CONSERVATION VALUE OF SEASCAPE CONNECTIVITY: A
GLOBAL SYNTHESIS (Abstract ID: 28230)
Connectivity structures populations, communities and ecosystems in the sea. The extent
of connectivity is, therefore, predicted to also influence the outcomes of conservation initiatives, such as marine reserves. We reviewed the published evidence of how
conservation outcomes. In the majority of cases, greater seascape connectivity inside
from research on connectivity, resulting in few studies (< 5% of all studies of seascape
connectivity) that have quantified how connectivity modifies reserve effects on populations, assemblages, or ecosystem functioning in seascapes. Nevertheless, evidence for
positive effects of connectivity on reserve performance is geographically widespread,
encompassing studies in the Caribbean Sea, Florida Keys and western Pacific Ocean.
Given that research rarely connects the effects of connectivity and reserves, our thesis is
that stronger linkages between landscape ecology and marine spatial planning are likely
to improve conservation outcomes in the sea. The key science challenge is to identify
the full range of ecological functions that are modulated by connectivity and the spatial
scale over which these functions enhance conservation outcomes.

PREDICTIVE MODELS AND TRADE-OFF ANALYSIS FOR GUIDING COSTEFFECTIVE LAND-BASED MANAGEMENT ACTIONS FOR CONSERVING CORAL
REEFS (Abstract ID: 28872)
Land-based source pollutants (LBSP) actively threaten coral reef ecosystems in west
Maui and around the world. Managers recognize that changes in land use directly affect
the export of sediments and nutrients to reefs, and are targeting management actions
require appropriate tools to estimate how alternative land use, land cover change, and
management practices may drive sediment and nutrient runoff into coastal waters. Additionally, because watersheds often cover multiple landowners, understanding the costs
of cooperative versus independent management actions relative to their effectiveness in
reducing LBSP is important for guiding cost-effective landscape-scale decision-making.
To meet these demands and advance effective and efficient land-based ocean conservation practices, we developed a spatially explicit predictive model that quantifies change
in LBSP from dirt road repair management actions (water bars and/or gravelling the
roads to divert and/or trap rainfall and sediment) across the landscape in west Maui. We
then employed the tool to investigate changes in LBSP arising from alternative spatial
configurations of roads repaired across the study domain and among multiple watersheds, and by landowners acting independently or in cooperation. Finally, we integrated
our model with a trade-off analysis to identify effective and efficient land-based management strategies that enable managers to maximize the value (and/or minimize the cost)


ADAPTIVELY MANAGING MARINE PROTECTED AREAS FOR RESILIENCE
THROUGH COLLABORATIVE LEARNING AND RESEARCH PARTNERSHIPS
(Abstract ID: 27855)
Marine protected areas (MPAs) are an important marine management tool for conserving ecosystems and ecosystem benefits. However, globally, many MPAs are not managed
251

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


nance capacity, SAM has become an alternative to provide community-based support to
government institutions and the academia conducting conservation-oriented research.
This fostered major educational transformation and technical empowerment in SAM to
plan and implement priority projects. Outcomes of this include sustained community
volunteers engagement, educational and outreach activities, and an increased number of
peer-reviewed publications. Lessons learned in the process will be discussed.

DEVELOPING A MULTI-STRESSOR GRADIENT FOR CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID:
29455)
Coral reefs are often found near coastal waters where multiple anthropogenic stressors
Clean Water Act requires relationships between anthropogenic stressors and coral reef
condition to be established. Developing stressor gradients presents challenges including:
stressors which co-occur but operate at different or unknown spatial and temporal
scales, inconsistent data availability measuring stressor levels, and unknown effects on
exposed reef biota. We are developing a generalized stressor model using Puerto Rico as
case study location, to represent the cumulative spatial/temporal co-occurrence of multiple anthropogenic stressors. Our approach builds on multi-stressor research in streams
and rivers, and focuses on three high-priority stressors identified by coral reef experts:
land-based sources of pollution (LBSP), global climate change (GCC) related temperature anomalies, and fishing pressure. Landscape development intensity index, based
on land use/land cover data, estimates human impact in watersheds adjacent to coral
to determine GCC thermal anomalies. Fishing pressure is modeled using gear-specific
and fishery landings data. Stressor data was adjusted to a common scale or weighted for
relative importance, buffered to account for diminished impact further from source, and
compared with coral condition data to provide a conceptual framework relating stressor
gradients to effects on coral condition.


DEVELOPMENT OF ACTIVE RESTORATION METHODOLOGY OF CORAL
REEFS IN OKINAWA, JAPAN, USING ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION (Abstract ID:
28233)
Some people are still reluctant for active coral restoration, as they consider that, besides
collateral damage to donor reefs, area that can be restored by means of transplantation
is very limited to compare large scale degradation of coral reefs. However, as nursery for
donor colonies can supply large numbers of transplantable seedling corals and spawning
of the out-planted corals brings effective larval dispersion tool for natural recruitment enhancement, the active restoration processes need to be considered. The Coral Reef Preservation and Rehabilitation Project by Okinawa Prefectural Government, Japan, attempts
to verify possibility of large-scale reef restoration since 2011. Three hectares of degraded
reefs are being restored with more than 100,000 nursery-farmed coral fragments. The
restored reefs will become larval dispersion hub after few years. The novel methodology
consists of 1) finding of suitable species and location for out-planting, 2) farming of donor
corals in nursery, 3) genomic DNA analysis of donor colonies, 4) farming of seedling
fragments in nursery, 5) out-planting design for a single species without clonal colony, 6)
combination of various species in wide area, and 7) long term monitoring.


OBSERVING PROCESS IN THE CARBONATE SYSTEM OF PACIFIC REEFS:
NATIONAL CORAL REEF MONITORING PROGRAM IN THE PACIFIC (Abstract ID:
29562)


Over the past decade, NOAA’s Coral Reef Ecosystem Program has been observing
chemical and ecological impacts of changing carbonate systems of Pacific coral reefs
at hundreds of sites around 35 islands spread across 45 degrees of latitude and 95
degrees of longitude. I will present an overview of the design of our observation system,
with specific reference to the challenges of observing in the face of both temporal and
spatial variability. In particular, I will discuss our observations of reef seawater chemistry,
including offshore reference sample to provide estimates of Net Ecosystem Calcification (NEC) and Net Ecosystem Production (NEP) at both inter-annual and diurnal time
scales. I will further discuss our efforts to develop a time and cost effective measure
of net calcification output, and will focus on the results of our Calcification Accretion
Units (CAUs). In both cases I will discuss the results of large-scale correlative models to
highlight potential environmental and ecological drivers of calcification in these systems,
and how these results may inform management and policy.

EVIDENCE FOR CLIMATE-DRIVEN SYNCHRONY OF MARINE AND TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS IN NORTHWEST AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 28477)
The effects of climate change are difficult to predict for many marine species because
little is known of their response to climate variations in the past. However, long-term
chronologies of growth, a variable that integrates multiple physical and biological factors,
are now available for several marine taxa. These allow us to search for climate-driven
synchrony in growth across multiple taxa and ecosystems, identifying the key processes
driving biological responses at large spatial scales. We hypothesized that in northwest
Australia, a region predicted to be strongly influenced by climate change, the El Niño
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon would influence the growth patterns of
organisms across ecosystems. To test this idea, we analysed the growth chronologies of
two marine fish Lutjanus argentimaculatus and Lethrinus nebulosus, the coral Porites spp.
and the tree Callitris columellaris. Principal components analysis and linear model selection showed evidence of ENSO-driven synchrony in growth among all four taxa at interannual time scales, the first such result for the Southern Hemisphere. Rainfall, sea surface
temperature and sea surface salinity, which are linked to the ENSO system, influenced
the annual growth of fishes, trees and corals. All four taxa had negative relationships with
ENSO, where positive growth patterns occurred during strong La Niña years. This finding
implies that future changes in the strength and frequency of ENSO events are likely to
have major consequences for both marine and terrestrial taxa.


COMMUNITY-BASED CORAL AQUACULTURE AND REEF REHABILITATION
PROGRAM: THIRTEEN YEARS OF LESSONS LEARNED OF CORAL REEF MANAGEMENT IN PUERTO RICO (Abstract ID: 28417 | Poster ID: 612)
Community-based engagement in coral reef management has become a fundamental
tool for supporting institutional activities. It can also foster significant hands-on and
behavior-modifying education of community stakeholders through direct participation
in conservation projects. However, there is still scarce information regarding lessons
learned from such experiences. We discuss the case study of non-governmental organization Sociedad Ambiente Marino (SAM) from Puerto Rico (PR) and its CommunityBased Coral Aquaculture and Reef Rehabilitation Program established in 2003. SAM use
low-tech coral farming to rehabilitate formerly bombarded coral reefs in PR, in collaboration with the University of Puerto Rico (UPR). This has allowed the academic-NGO
integration in multiple marine applied research projects, significantly increasing SAM’s
technical training for leading conservation oriented research. It also empowered SAM
to write their own grants, obtain and administer external funds, and implement multiple
projects. In a time of unprecedented socio-economic constriction and declining gover-


CRUSTOSE CORALLINE ALGAE, DOLOMITE, AND THE HISTORY OF MG/CA
WITHIN THE CENOZOIC OCEAN (Abstract ID: 29849)
It has been recognized by several scientists over the past 30 years that dolomite precipitation, or lack of it, drives the Mg/Ca of sea water on time scales of millions of years.

252

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

The problem has been that no one had been able to put their finger on a mechanism for
the deposition of abundant dolomite in marine and in particular coral reef ecosystems.
With the discovery that crustose coralline algae (CCA) is the source of dolomite, we now
have a specific sedimentary depositional environment we can call on for its origins. The
CCA dominated algal rims and flats, most pronounced on mature and senile reefs, have
the highest concentrations of dolomite, and are largely located in the intertidal zone.
What we observe is that CCA abundance becomes more pronounced if the reef flat
spends longer within that intertidal zone, hence sea level stability is key to concentrating
how sea level instability has lead to the decline in the abundance of this stable shallow
water environment ever since Antarctica was glaciated 33.9 million years ago. This has
lead to a corresponding decline in dolomite deposition and an increase in the Mg/Ca of
sea water through the late Cenozoic.

CHARACTERIZATION OF METABOLITES IN CORALS UNDER CONDITIONS OF
HIGH SALINITY (Abstract ID: 28615 | Poster ID: 105)
Corals are frequently exposed to changes in salinity. Previously, it was thought that
they could not respond to these changes; however, recent literature suggests them to
their external environment. To further understand the effects of increased salinity on
corals, we conducted a long-term in situ experiment with Fungia granulosa exposed to
highly increased salinity levels. Contrary to expectation, coral colonies appeared visually
healthy and photosynthesis efficiency was unaffected indicating unimpaired coral host
and algal symbiont functioning. In comparison, the associated microbiome displayed
drastic changes that could be associated with putative changes in metabolite production
associated with salinity tolerance. We are currently applying Gas Chromatography Mass
Spectrometry (GC/MS) to quantify the concentration of metabolites and subsequent
identification by comparison to a reference compound library. We expect to find different
metabolite concentrations in the coral holobiont under different salinity levels, and we
will discuss possible osmoregulatory functions of these metabolites.



SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL PATTERNS OF RECRUITMENT AND REPRODUCTION, AND STOCK-RECRUITMENT RELATIONSHIP OF CRUSTOSE CORALLINE
ALGAE ON HERON ISLAND- GBR (Abstract ID: 28042)
Crustose coralline algae (CCA) are key organisms for coral reef ecosystems as they
play important roles in reef building and reef resilience. While the number of studies
looking at the impacts of anthropogenic activities on CCA has recently increased, very
little is still known about their basic biological and ecological processes. This study
aims to understand the spatial and temporal patterns of reproduction, recruitment,
and the relationship between early stages and adult abundance of CCA around Heron
Island, southern Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Three reef habitats were studied across
four climatic seasons. CCA recruitment patterns were assessed using settlement plates
and surveys were carried out to study the community of CCA adults. To determine
the nature of the relationship between reproduction and recruitment, the reproductive
structures of Porolithon. c. f. onkodes sp. were analysed at each habitat and season. The
recruitment of CCA in Heron island reef varied significantly throughout the year and
among reef habitats. Community structure of both the recruits and adults varied among
seasons and habitats. Further, a positive relationship between reproductive output and
recruitment, and adult stock and recruitment abundance was found, suggesting that
CCA populations are, predominantly, “closed” populations. Overall, this information is
fundamental for a better understanding of the patterns and causes of algal distributions
in reefs, and the possible impacts of global environmental change on this important
group of reef builders.

THE EFFECT OF WAVE EXPOSURE AND COMPETITION FOR SPACE ON THE
COMMUNITY COMPOSITION OF CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28936)
The effect of wave energy on the survivorship of corals is highly dependent on the coral
growth form. Corals with higher skeletal density and lower resistance against water
motion are less likely to be affected by wave energy. Here we use high resolution wave
modelling to assess the effect of wave exposure on the relative abundance of corals
grouped in three growth forms (massive, branching and tabular) around Heron Island
Reef (Eastern Australia). We then incorporate the empirical relationships observed in an
existing coral reef ecosystem model to be able to explore the effect of future disturbance
scenarios at different levels of wave exposure. Our results suggest that 52% of the
variability in coral community composition can be explained using a combination of 4
wave exposure metrics and the slope of the reef. We also identify that at low levels of
wave exposure dominant populations are highly resistant to competitive displacement
due to the low natural mortality in these conditions. These results suggests that although
wave exposure can be used to predict the relative abundance of different growth forms,
at least at low levels of wave exposure, ecological interactions and unusual recruitment
events may be stronger drivers of community composition.


edu

THROUGH CAPACITY BUILDING TOWARD CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEM PROTECTION (Abstract ID: 28160)

CONSUMER’S RESPONSIBLE SEAFOOD CONSUMPTION IS VITAL FOR CORAL
REEF HEALTH (Abstract ID: 28155 | Poster ID: 262)

The USVI priority setting and capacity assessment processes identified the need for improved enforcement as a key priority in order to improve the condition and sustainability
of coral reef ecosystem resources. Historically, people living and working in USVI have
identified the need for improved enforcement as a Territorial priority as reflected in the
USVI economic assessment and in the 2005 “United Stated Virgin Islands Marine Resources and Fisheries Strategic and Comprehensive Conservation Plan” created by the
Department of Planning and Natural Resources (DPNR) Division of Fish and Wildlife
groups suggested the need for additional officers, increased patrols, and increased site
inspections supported through increased funding. The 2012 USVI Capacity Assessment
made similar recommendations. NOAA’s Coral Reef Conservation Program provided
multi-year funds through FY13 to build capacity through officer training, a policy gap
analysis and targeted solutions, and the analysis of enforcement data to identify focal
areas for a long-term training plan. DPNR is now also working toward the creation and
implementation of a strategic plan for enforcement to enhance consistency of enforcement procedures and increase capacity for protection of coral reef ecosystems in the

The Caribbean Fishery Management Council Outreach and Education initiative is targeting seafood consumers: fishers, fishmongers, fish markets restaurant owners and general
public, to promote public understanding of coral reef dynamics, and thus understand the
importance and significance of management measures applied to the fisheries. The main
goal of this initiative is to establish the basis for a fisheries literacy among the consumer
public to support a sustainable reef fishery, beginning with responsible fishers and a
consumer’s chain that will purchase species not prohibited and with healthy populations. Coral reefs are complex ecosystems in which the physical structure, the species
dynamics of corals and other species, physico-chemical and biotic processes and
connections among them, including human activities define the health of the ecosystem.
Fish and invertebrate species that form the fisheries in the Caribbean Region are all part
of this complex ecosystem, and understanding the dynamics of their populations by the
consumers is essential. The management measures that need to be applied to these species (closed seasons and/or closed areas to protect reproduction aggregations or areas
where the juvenile grow) have socioeconomic impact on their communities. This information very rarely is delivered to the consumers in understandable format and language.
Through outreach and education strategies consumers understand why they should not
consume these species during their closed seasons, and the need for these management
measures, that on the long term, guarantee that the populations of these species will be
healthy and that the fisheries will be sustainable.


253

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


sampled; however, psbA diverged with latitude, particularly within Porites sp. suggesting
population-level differences. In contrast, and consistent with recent studies, we report for the
first time in the Red Sea, the variability in microbial communities within and between species across sites. Corals from two sites (Hurghada and Jeddah) were exposed to a thermal
stress experiment which demonstrated that corals were more heat resistant at Hurghada
(annual SST mean is 3.3 ˚C less than Jeddah); however Symbiodinium clade types (ITS2)
were identical at both sites. The functional role of the microbiome in the thermal tolerance
of the holobiont across different thermal regimes is currently being explored.

SPATIAL PATTERNS OF SYMBIONTS AND CORALS ARISING FROM PROPAGULE
REDIRECTION (Abstract ID: 27987)
patch or the density of other symbionts that occupy the patch). However, the density
of coral symbionts, such as fish, also can be influenced by the density and proximity of
adjacent coral colonies. Here, we summarize past work on “propagule redirection” (or
long-term consequences on spatial patterns in fishes (or other coral symbionts). Using
spatially explicit simulations and analytic models, we determine the situations in which
variation in the density of symbionts can be achieved even when patches are identical
in their inherent quality. Heterogeneous patterns of settlement result from propagule redirection when corals patches are distributed non-uniformly in space. This heterogeneity
of settlers, weak post-settlement density-dependent survival, and longer times between
settlement events. Variation in settlement arising from the spatial patterning of habitat
can therefore be an important process shaping long-term spatial patterns of organisms
occupying patchy habitats. Furthermore, because the density of symbionts can affect
coral growth and survival, propagule redirection may be responsible for pattern formation in corals, as well as in the organisms that occupy these corals.


THE FISHMARK TOOL FOR BENCHMARKING FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN
MUNICIPAL WATERS (Abstract ID: 29439)
Fisheries laws in the Philippines provide an enabling environment for local fisheries management programs in municipal waters. These programs generally comprise of adoption
of a fisheries management plan, enforcement, institutional development and partnership,
legislation and regulation, and monitoring and evaluation. After over two decades of
local fisheries governance and considerable efforts done in coastal resources management, fisheries management remains a lesser priority of local governments. One of the
prevailing issues is the limited capacity to assess the effectiveness of their programs
on fisheries management. The Fisheries Management Assessment and Rating Toolkit
(FishMARK)aims to objectively monitor and evaluate programs relative to fisheries management with focus on capture and marine-related fisheries. It serves as a tool to gather
critical lessons on adaptive management and sustainability. Nested in five governance
areas, the FishMARK consists of 27 indicators and 108 verifiable sub-indicators. The
FishMARK is a means to improve management of fisheries by LGUs by reviewing actions (inputs) and assessing results (outcomes). A FISHMARK evaluation was conducted
in 12 focal sites across the Philippines. Preliminary results show that more than half of
the sites fall under very similar conditions either at Pre-level or Level 1. Ultimately, the
results would show that a standardized tool is critical. Lessons were identified to help
redirect efforts toward adaptive management.


REEFOLUTION – A NEW CORAL REEF DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM IN KENYA
(Abstract ID: 29335)
A reef development program named REEFolution was recently launched in Southeast
Kenya, aiming at improving coral reef environments in order to enhance fish stocks,
increase possibilities for dive tourism and conserve nature. Pilot activities started in
September 2015 with the positioning of three types of coral nurseries in the Wasini
Channel, a shallow, dynamic coastal area with a high tidal amplitude, moderate coral
cover and a relatively high turbidity. Nursery types tested were 1) rope nurseries
positioned on the seafloor (variable distance to the sea surface); 2) rope nurseries on
floating frames (fixed distance to the sea surface) and 3) tree-type nurseries. Four species
of coral were cultured on each nursery type: three scleractinian corals (Porites cylindrica,
Acropora muricata, Pocillopora meandrina) and one fire coral (Millepora sp). Whereas
Acropora, Pocilloporaand Millepora performed well, with high survival rates and good
growth during the first three months, culture of Porites was less successful. The three
nursery types performed similarly; the tree-type nurseries were least sensitive to fouling
and were the most convenient option regarding costs for construction and maintenance.
Current activities of the program include upscaling of the nurseries, outplacement of
cultured corals on damaged areas of natural reefs (reef restoration) and the installation
of artificial structures for outplacement of cultured corals (reef building). Future plans
include the establishment of an offshore, floating reef that may act as a refuge for corals
under the threats of climate change.


IMPACT OF SNORKELERS ON SHALLOW CORAL REEF COMMUNITIES IN
PALAU (Abstract ID: 29036)
The Republic of Palau has always been a popular destination for tourists, especially
those who seek to snorkel and/or dive Palau’s World Heritage reefs. Over the past
couple of years, concerns on the state of marine ecosystems have risen due to the rapid
increase of visitors at snorkeling sites. In 2008, Palau had a total of 83,180 visitors. In
2015, that number had almost doubled to over 161,000 visitors. This study investigated
the impacts of snorkelers on the shallow coral reef communities, their behaviors in the
water, and the tour guide practices. Surveys on coral fragmentation, benthic cover, fish
density, snorkelers and tour guide behaviors were conducted in July 2015 and January
2016 at 5 popular snorkeling sites and 5 non-popular sites within the World Heritage Site.
Results showed a higher coral fragmentation and percentage cover of rubble at most of
the popular sites than at the non-popular sites. Most of the visitors came from neighboring Asian countries such as China, Japan, Taiwan and Korea. A majority of these groups
that visited the studied sites lacked confident swimming abilities and relied heavily on
floatation devices. Observations showed lack of proper in-water guidance and supervision of snorkelers. Any correlation between reef assessment and snorkelers and/or
tour guides’ behaviors will also be explored and presented. Findings will be adapted into
management recommendations and communicated to government agencies to improve
the present conservation management practices.


REORGANIZATION OF THE CORAL MICROBIOME ACROSS LATITUDINAL GRADIENTS OF THERMAL HISTORY IN THE RED SEA (Abstract ID: 29538)


Corals in the Red Sea where seasonal sea surface temperatures can be extreme, provide
unique capacity to gauge the physiological and molecular adjustments required for reef
resistance to climate change. Whilst the coral host can physiologically adapt to persist and
thrive in more marginal environments, the role of associated microbiome and Symbiodinium spp. reorganization (“holobiont adaptation”) remains unresolved. We therefore
examined how symbiont identity (ITS2, psbA) and the bacterial community structure (16S
meta-genomic next generation sequencing) differs along thermal gradient of the Red Sea.
Corals were sampled from six key coral species persisting across five sites across Red Sea
(29˚ to 20˚ N) that experience different thermal regimes. Symbiodinium spp. ITS2 identity
associated with each coral species generally remained highly conserved throughout the sites

FILL AN OLD NICHE OR FIND A NEW ONE? COMPARING HABITAT USE FOR
INVASIVE REEF FISHES IN NATIVE AND INVADED CORAL REEF HABITATS
WITH SPECIES DISTRIBUTION MODELS (Abstract ID: 29988)
were introduced to the Main Hawaiian Islands in the 1950s to boost local coral reef
fisheries. These introduced species have native home ranges in other archipelagos in the
Western Central Pacific Ocean. Their success as prominent fisheries have been lack-

254

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

The Gulf of Mannar (GoM) biosphere reserve (10500 sq. km., with 21 fringing reefs) is
the second reef region to be afforded total protection by the Government of India since
1986. In conjunction with the declaration of all reef building corals as fully protected in
the conservation initiatives of the GoM with those of the Great Barrier Reef (GBR),
this paper discusses what measures could add strength to the conservation of reefs of
the third world and how sustainable management of reef resources could be built into
the conservation initiatives. Some such measures needed are scientific studies such as
coral reproduction, recruitment rate, community dynamics and post-bleaching structure
of the ecosystem that could help in identifying the priority areas for attention and
improve the health, function and resilience of the reef ecosystem. This also needs to be
supplemented with policies on rational and sustainable use of renewable organic reef
resources such as commercial and recreational fisheries, pharmaceutical and bio-active
compounds. The value of this discussion lies in its applicability to reefs beyond the GoM,
to those in several other regions where scientific approaches are not as well developed
as in the GBR case.

luster for various reasons despite successful establishment in the Hawaiian Archipelago.
The establishing success of an introduced species in a new area is related to how well
it interacts with its new environment. Habitat use is a common way to understand the
niche partitioning of introduced organisms in new environments. Herein, we employ
current species distribution modelling approaches to link pertinent benthic habitat and
environmental covariates with the distributions of these three species from standard reef
fish diver surveys in the Main Hawaiian Islands, Mariana Archipelago, and American
Samoa. Subsequently, for each species the models were cross-evaluated among regions
to quantify the extent to which benthic habitat and environmental covariates could
predict species density by juvenile and adult life stages in the different regions. This type
of work provides insight into the niche structure of these species in their native and
invaded habitats, as well as the generality of habitat-based species distribution modelling
on broad geographic scales.

