USING SCIENCE TO INFORM TRADITIONAL MARINE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (SASI) IN THE BIRD’S HEAD SEASCAPE MPA NETWORK, RAJA AMPAT,
INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 28300 | Poster ID: 613)


MORPHOLOGICAL VARIATION IN THE COLONIES OF THE HARD CORAL
ACROPORA HYACINTHUS IN SHELTERED AND EXPOSED CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 29420 | Poster ID: 42)

Sasi is a traditional marine resource management system in the Raja Ampat Archipelago,
typically consisting of periodic closures for key species. Bridging traditional wisdom and
modern fisheries science, we conducted a study to inform best sasi practices to optimize
catch of key fisheries species. Specifically, we conducted a study within Kawe MPA to
investigate changes in catch of key fisheries species across different periodic closures.
Length and weight was recorded from sasi target species caught by local fishers, including
sea cucumbers (Holothuria), lobster (Panulirus), and top-shell (Trochus) during the sasi
opening event in 2009 (following a one year closure) and again in 2012 (following a three
year closure). As expected, results showed that catch amount, size, and length from a sasi
location that was closed for three years was significantly higher than catch following a one
year closure. However, the three year closure restricted access to key fisheries species
for a much longer duration. Using this information, we developed recommendations for
individual sasi species based on their life-history to maximize catch which fell between the
one and three year closures. This study will provide recommendations for management
guidelines across the Bird’s Head Seascape MPA network to optimize catch of sasi species supporting the continuation of sustainable fisheries practices.

Aspects of colony morphology and population genetic structure were measured for
several colonies of the hard coral Acropora hyacinthus in exposed and protected reefs
in the Philippines to investigate the effect of wave exposure on the structure of colonies.
Measurements were made on underwater photographs of live colonies to limit time
spent in the field. A size and color reference card was included in each photograph. No
significant differences in colony morphology were found between colonies in exposed
and sheltered areas for colony size, branch density and branch thickness; though there
was a significant difference in the diameter of the axial corallites (those in the exposed
colonies were slightly smaller). There was a significant difference in the depth where
these colonies were found, with those in the exposed area being found deeper and on
the reef slope while those in the sheltered area found shallower and on the reef flat.

ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS ON SEXUAL REPRODUCTION OF REEF BUILDING


Using field observations and laboratory analyses we explored the reproductive biology
of two of the most broadly distributed and important reef builders in the main Hawaiian
Islands, Montipora capitata and Porites compressa. Specifically, this study examined (1)
the relationship between environment, size, morphology and reproductive capacity in
Montipora capitata (2) the role of parental effects in dictating the phenotypic range of
traits in coral offspring and (3) how thermal stress (bleaching) affects the reproductive
months and lunar days, and that the proportion of colonies spawning and synchrony
of spawning do not reflect coral colony morphology or colony size. Furthermore, we
found large biochemical differences between adults and eggs, with the latter containing
higher concentration of lipids, ubiquitinated proteins and antioxidants. Despite the broad
phenotypic plasticity displayed by adults, parental investment in the context of provisioning of energy reserves and antioxidant defense was the same in eggs from the different
sites. Current analyses are focused on comparing reproductive characteristics in colonies
(from both species) exposed to different sedimentation regimes and that were affected
during the 2014 bleaching event.

IMPACTS & DYNAMICS OF AN OUTBREAK SPECIES OF CORAL ON A REMOTE
ATOLL BEFORE AND AFTER A SUPER-TYPHOON (Abstract ID: 28030)
Despite relatively low human population sizes in Ulithi Atoll, Micronesia, concern is
mounting over declining coral reef health. Upon invitation, we began conducting annual
ecological surveys there in 2012. We documented an “outbreak” coral - an undescribed
species of Montipora. Its presence is strongly correlated with human activities, peaking
in abundance at boat landings, heavily fished areas, and moderately exposed sites. This
coral appears to be causing declines in reef function due to its ability to quickly overgrow
other corals, limiting coral diversity, reducing structural complexity, and depressing fish
diversity and abundance. Its presence and abundance on reefs was a major driver in
site clustering based on benthic structure, and dendrograms of fish diversity showed
remarkably similar patterns, indicative of ecological relationships between corals and
fish communities. Clustering of reef sites remained stable for 3 years; however, in 2015,
Typhoon Maysak hit Ulithi Atoll directly, causing severe damage. We surveyed reefs on
and adjacent to the Atoll 2 months post-typhoon and found that while coral community
structure was relatively stable among sites, the outbreak Montipora sp. was strongly
impacted, with live cover reduced to fine rubble due to wave action and heavy scouring
at many sites. Our 2016 surveys will help reveal whether the storm and the reef management actions of the islanders will affect the dynamics of this outbreak, allowing formerly
Montipora-dominated reefs to regain species diversity, or whether the disturbance will
facilitate its spread.

CUES FROM SPACE WAR OF MARINE SPONGES AND THE RELATIONSHIP
WITH HUMAN TUMOR CELL PROLIFERATION INHIBITORY ACTIVITY (Abstract
ID: 29377 | Poster ID: 101)
Twenty five species of marine sponges were selectively sampled from coral reefs of
Palk Bay and Gulf of Mannar, India. The selection was based on sponges growing
in sheltered environment, least diverse area (<3-8 individuals/M2), and absence of
conspicuous surface macrofoulers. Extracts of selected sponges were subjected to
cytotoxicity (100µg ml-1) with brine shrimp (Artemia salina) and anticancer activity (25µg
ml-1) against human breast, stomach (AGS), lung, central nervous system (CNS) and
colon tumor cell lines. About 88% of the sponge extracts tested showed cytotoxicity
toArtemia salina and the mortality varied between 16 and 100%. Nine species showed
more than 90% mortality. With regard to anticancer activity, extracts of 56% of sponges

GULF OF MANNAR MARINE NATIONAL PARK: MEASURES NEEDED FOR
STRENGTHENING EFFECTIVE CONSERVATION (Abstract ID: 28626 | Poster ID: 674)
255

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

to establish a baseline of conditions, so that managers can understand not only the
status, but also specific challenges that exist to improve the ecological functioning of
the project. Higher levels of chemical contaminants were found in Mangrove Lagoon
and Benner Bay in the western portion of the study area. Copper at one site in Benner
Bay was above a NOAA guideline (ERM) indicating that effects on benthic organisms
were likely. The concentration of tributyltin (TBT) in sediment cores was nearly an order
of magnitude higher than any found in NOAA’s National Status and Trends (NS&T)
Program data base. Results of multiple bioassays indicated significant sediment toxicity
in Mangrove Lagoon and Benner Bay. The benthic infaunal communities in Mangrove
Lagoon and Benner Bay were also severely diminished. Nutrients and sedimentation
were elevated in the STEER as well; some concentrations were above proposed thresholds, which could indicate impacts to the reefs in the STEER

were active. Among the various cell lines screened against sponge metabolites, colon
cancer cell line was more susceptible (52%) followed by breast (20%), lung (32%), CNS
(32%), and AGS (28%). The breast cell line was least susceptible. The extracts of Axinella
tenuidigitata, Axinella carteri, Clathria procera, Petrosia nigricans andOceanapia fistulosa,
were active against almost all cancer cell lines tested. The highest cytotoxicity among
the cell lines varied between 43.67 ± 2.42 and 80.03 ± 8.89%. Significant correlation
was found between cytotoxic activity and the observed surface fouling and reduction in
sponge habitat diversity.

MICROFRAGMENTING FOR THE SUCCESSFUL PROPAGATION AND RESTORATION OF SLOW GROWING BOULDER CORALS (Abstract ID: 28710)
Slow growing, massive stony corals have often been overlooked in reef-restoration activities, despite their significant contribution to reef framework. Techniques to effectively
propagate and successfully outplant these species have proven challenging, however,
advancement in methodology may increase rates of success. In 2013, Orbicella faveolata
and Montastrea cavernosa fragments were outplanted on reefs within the lower Florida
Keys, to determine whether “microfragmenting” corals increased the rate of survival and
substrate coverage (a proxy for growth) after outplanting. Microfragmenting was defined
about 50 cm2, were planted near one large fragment of similar size. Eight replicate pairs
were randomly planted within the study site, which was approximately 100m2. Fragments
were monitored for substrate coverage and survival over 31 months, spanning two bleaching events. Initial predation occurred to varying degrees on microfragments, but was absent in large fragments. Survival and growth did not differ overall between large fragments
and microfragment arrays. However, excluding plots with >40% predation showed that
used large fragment. Results from this study suggest that if predation events are reduced,
massive corals can be successfully grown and outplanted for restoration purposes.


MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION: SHORT TERM
INSIGHTS FROM PAPUA, INDONESIA (Abstract ID: 29657)
Marine protected areas (MPAs) are an integral component of local, national, and international strategies for biodiversity conservation, but their impacts on human well-being
remain contested. Advocates tout MPAs as win-win strategies for conservation and
poverty alleviation, while opponents argue that MPAs place the welfare of fish above the
well-being of impoverished fishing communities. To inform this debate, we are monitoring the social impacts of six MPAs in the Bird’s Head Seascape (BHS). Using a quasiexperimental design, we examine social well-being across five social domains: economic
well-being, health, political empowerment, education, and culture. Preliminary impact
data from six MPAs and matched controls provides insights into the short-term impacts
of MPA establishment on household well-being. We find that the social impacts of MPAs
are far from uniform, with the magnitude and direction of impacts varying within and
among social groups, across social domains, and between sites, resulting in complex arrays of impacts. In addition to providing insights for site-level adaptive management, the
variable social impacts of MPA establishment in the BHS highlights the need for a more
nuanced approach to evaluating the social impacts of conservation interventions as the
foundation for analyzing protected area –poverty linkages.



DIFFERENTIAL MODIFICATIONS OF SEAWATER CARBONATE CHEMISTRY BY
MAJOR CORAL REEF BENTHIC COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 28171)

EFFECT OF BALANCED AND IMBALANCED NUTRIENT ENRICHMENT ON THE
BLEACHING RESPONSE OF TWO CARIBBEAN CORALS DURING HEAT STRESS
(Abstract ID: 29993)

Ocean acidification (OA) may threaten coral reefs through reduction of calcification and
increased calcium carbonate bioerosion and dissolution. In addition to anthropogenic
OA, reef seawater carbonate chemistry is strongly influenced by benthic net metabolism.
Therefore, predicting future reef seawater carbonate chemistry requires an understanding of how benthic communities modify their chemical environment and the potential
metabolic responses of these communities to future environmental change. The
relationship between five benthic reef communities (sand, crustose coralline algae, coral,
fleshy algae, and mixed community) and seawater carbonate chemistry was studied in
flow-through mesocosm experiments during two seasons under ambient and acidified
conditions. Graphic analysis of total alkalinity (TA) and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC)
vectors was used to assess the relative balance between net community calcification and
net community organic production, and whether TA-DIC relationships can be used as a
tool to characterize benthic reef metabolism and composition. Fleshy algae, which had
the lowest TA-DIC slopes, elevated seawater pH the most during the day while calcifying communities had the highest TA-DIC slopes but very small influence on seawater
nighttime dissolution rates resulted in increased TA-DIC slopes and partially buffered
against nighttime acidification owing to net respiration.

Interacting global and local stressors usually act together in driving the decline of coral
reefs, with local impacts such as declining water quality often exacerbating global
impacts such as coral bleaching, and vice versa. Recently, it has been suggested that
poor water quality can decrease coral thermotolerance, either due to proliferation of the
coral’s algal symbionts under high nutrients and/or to exposure to imbalanced nutrient
supply. We investigated the effect of balanced and imbalanced nutrient addition on the
abundance of different Symbiodinium hosted by the Caribbean coralsSiderastrea siderea
and Montastraea cavernosa and their subsequent response to heat stress. Replicate
cores (N=60, from 6 colonies of each species) were exposed to elevated nitrogen (N),
nitrogen+phosphorus (NP), nitrogen+phosphorous+feeding (NPF), or iron (Fe), and
compared to controls over a 180-day period. Thermotolerance was then measured by
exposing corals to 32oC for 2 weeks. Throughout the experiment we used quantitative
PCR to identify and quantify different symbionts, and chlorophyll fluorometry to assess
their photochemical efficiency (Fv/Fm). This study allowed us to test the degree to
which improving water quality might enhance future coral reef resilience to continued
global warming.



PRESENCE AND IMPACTS OF LAND-BASED SOURCES OF POLLUTION IN THE

MULTIPLE PREDATOR EFFECTS ON JUVENILE PREY MORTALITY (Abstract ID:
28594)

The St. Thomas East End Reserves, or STEER is a collection of Marine Reserves and
Virgin Islands. NOAA’s National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science conducted a project

Loss of marine top-predators often leads to mesopredator release. Understanding the
net effect that mesopredator release may have on low trophic-level fish is a key issue, but
can be challenging to predict and measure in situ. Each mesopredator can impact prey

256

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

differentially and generally their combined effects cannot be predicted from their independent contributions. Using small mesopredator fishes with either active (Pseudochromis
fuscus (F)) or ambush hunting mode (Cephalopholis boenak (B) and Epinephelus maculatus
(M)), we conducted a mesocosm experiment to examine their predation rate on six
damselfish juveniles (Pomacentrus spp). Treatments included each predator on its own
(F, B, M) and all possible paired interactions (FF, BB, MM, FB, FM, BM). Prey mortality
from predator pairs with different hunting mode either matched (FB) or exceeded (FM)
the mortality expected from their individual effects. Interestingly, although pairs of active
predators (FF) caused the expected mortality, the combination of ambush predators
did generate risk-enhancing effects, but only within intraspecific pairs (BB, MM). For
the interspecific combination of ambush predators (BM), prey mortality was lower than
predicted (risk-reducing effect). Our study suggests multiple predator effects may be influenced by the hunting mode of predators, but also by the specific taxon of the species
interacting. Further, it highlights the complexity of intraguild behavioural interactions and
their importance for accurately predicting the consequences of mesopredator release.

THE STATUS OF REEF BENTHOS IN MARINE PROTECTED AREAS IN THE
PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 28608 | Poster ID: 672)
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are popular tools to help rehabilitate marine habitats
and conserve biodiversity. While MPAs primarily impact fish communities, the response
of reef benthic components are less straightforward. MPAs benefit the reef benthos by
lessening damage due to human activities. Also, MPAs help maintain healthy herbivore
populations which control algae from dominating the reefs. Here we present the condition of the benthic communities from 27 municipalities in the Philippines. Benthic cover
was derived using the line intercept transect methods in more than 260 50-m transects
inside and outside 28 MPAs. Most of the MPAs were in the fair condition, with an average hard coral cover of 42.3%. While it is assumed that protection will lead to better
coral condition, hard coral cover did not significantly differ among transects inside and
outside the MPAs. Likewise, covers of other benthic components such dead coral, algae,
etc. did not vary with respect to protection. Condition, mortality, development, and
succession indices were also explored. Differences in reef benthos were detected across
municipalities and biogeographic regions. This implies that factors driving variation in
reef benthos operate at larger scales.



THRIVING IN THE FACE OF NATURAL EXTREMES: WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED
AT OFU ISLAND, AMERICAN SAMOA, ABOUT THE FUTURE ADAPTABILITY OF
CORALS? (Abstract ID: 28221)
Healthy, growing corals in the back reef lagoons of Ofu Island experience large periodic
swings in temperature, pH, oxygen, and other environmental factors that conventional
wisdom suggests should limit their survival. An eight-year research program has used
genomics, reciprocal transplants, common gardens and standardized stress tests to
show that that these corals adapt and acclimate to environmental extremes across short
temporal and spatial scales. Transcriptome and genome-wide variants help pinpoint the
physiological traits most central to adaptation and acclimation, and highlight the genetic
machinery associated with effective adaptation. The genetic architecture of adaptation
appears to involve hundreds of genes, yet each individual coral also shows the ability to
adjust its physiological tolerances through rapid acclimation. In addition, symbiont type
varies with location and bleaching history. A general evolutionary model suggests that a
high variability in fitness traits in the face of environmental variation is expected when
environmental change occurs over spatial scales that are shorter than dispersal distances. This short scale of variation is common for reef species that live across fore and
back reef environments. As a result, genetic variation for environmental resilience may
be a common feature of large reef populations. Using this variation to enhance future
reef survival might be advanced by protection of adaptation hotspots, restoration using
the most resilient colonies, and maintenance of large populations with high variability.

CENTRAL PLACE REFUGING IN MARINE PREDATORS THAT NEVER SLEEP:
EATING AT HOME AND AWAY (Abstract ID: 27998)
Central place refuging (CRF) is seen in a wide range of animals, including insects, fish
and humans. In most cases the function of CRF is clear; the animal moves to/from a
shelter or den site. CRF behavior is also seen in reef sharks, which swim continuously
but would not seem to require a ‘core’ area to which they return. We used a combination of acoustic telemetry, biologging, and statistical modelling to understand potential
drivers of CRF in reef sharks (blacktip and grey reef sharks) at an uninhabited atoll.
Acceleration sensors and hidden Markov modelling identified crepuscular or nocturnal
peaks in activity, but there was only a small increase in the probability of animals being
active during peak periods. Animal-borne video cameras revealed that sharks would
forage during the day on the reef, when they should be less active. We used acoustic
telemetry with Brownian bridge models to generate 3D time-utilization distributions,
which incorporated probability of activity, for individuals tracked over several years. Reef
sharks showed strong residency to certain areas and displayed habitat shifts (diel) that
display CRF behavior that is counter to predictions as they forage both in their core area
and likely their excursion habitats. The use of a core area may improve navigation especially if the animal uses reduced brain activity during the daytime as a replacement for
‘sleep’. Future studies will investigate the implications of these behaviors to ecosystem
predation effects and degrees of inter and intra-specific competition.


IMPROVING SCIENTIFIC INPUT INTO CORAL REEF MANAGEMENT AND
POLICY (Abstract ID: 28906)
Recent consensus on the new Anthropocene geological epoch marks widespread recognition of the permanent influence of Homo sapiens on planet Earth. Coral reefs are
often cited as one of the most vulnerable ecosystems impacted by humans. The direct
conduit from science to management is one of the most important tools we have for
conserving coral reefs. Here I will discuss a number of ways in which the effectiveness
of this nexus can be strengthened: 1) prioritizing research questions, ensuring that we are
asking the right questions, or at least, not ignoring important ones; 2) getting the message
right by incorporating nuance into public and policy debates; 3) expanding temporal
perspectives to avoid misguided policies subject to shifted ecological baselines; 4) embracing and reporting uncertainty – anticipate not only what will happen when negative
scientific predictions turn out to be true but also if they turn out to be false; 5) providing
insight on potential biases; and 6) acknowledging the simultaneous effects of multiple
stressors and the geographical variation in response to stressors. Recent studies of both
Caribbean and Indo-Pacific reefs have shown one size doesn’t fit all reefs for response to
human activities and climate change. Incorporating these key concepts will allow coral
reef scientists to serve the management and conservation community while maintaining
scientific integrity, allowing the research community to continue to provide effective
leadership in advising reef managers and environmental policymakers.


GENETIC TYPING OF TRIDACNIDS AND THEIR ALGAL SYMBIONTS ON THE
CENTRAL SAUDI COAST OF THE RED SEA (Abstract ID: 30144 | Poster ID: 57)
The Red Sea hosts a diverse community of coral reef organisms despite relatively extreme environmental conditions (high temperature and salinity). Due to these conditions,
the Red Sea may offer insight to the capacity of reef fauna elsewhere to adapt to climate
change. Tridacnids, a family of giant clams, are found throughout the Indo-Pacific, including within the Red Sea. This study examines the species diversity of giant clams and
their algal symbionts from the central Saudi coast of the Red Sea using a combined morphological and molecular approach. Samples were collected at nine different reefs from
both the sheltered and exposed sides of depths between 5 and 10 m. Results will be presented on whether or not reef side and type correlated with species diversity. A total of
potentially be specific to the Red Sea. When examining the diversity of Symbiodinium,
all samples were found to belong to clade A, which is common in Red Sea corals. Giant
clams did not appear to be affected during a thermal bleaching event that took place


257

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

involves extensive fieldwork, which proves to be very expensive. It is then useful to test
if other sources of information, like satellital images, could be used to lessen the cost
of such assessments. We studied the distribution of various satellite derived variables
park “Arrecife de Puerto Morelos”, which stands out for the highly conserved of some of
bands from a corrected WV2 image. After that, we used the information from an
extensive fieldwork assessing Acropora cover to assign a level to each segment. Finally,
we obtained the conditional distribution of the satellital variables per segment for each
coverage. But complementary data like bathymetry and geomorphological features
is not. We believe this is an important first step in the use of more powerful statistical
techniques.

during this study, potentially due to the tolerance of the Symbiodinium. Further research
on the role of Symbiodinium biodiversity and their interaction with giant clam hosts is
necessary to understand the capacity of these and other photosymbiotic organisms to
adapt in the face of climate change in the Red Sea.
com

RECRUITMENT PULSES OF A BROODER DAMSELFISH, ACANTHOCHROMIS
POLYACANTHUS IN PUJADA BAY, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29999 | Poster ID: 195)
The damsel brooder, Acanthochromis polyacanthus is one of the only two reef fishes
with no pelagic larval duration. It has a narrow distribution ranging from GBR to Indonesia and all the way up to the southwestern portion of the Philippines. The recruitment
was able to disperse and attain its present distribution. Two stations in Pujada Bay
(Tamisan and Catmunan Reefs) were surveyed monthly from January to November at
2 to 6 transects each. Tamisan Reef is exposed during the southwest monsoon (June to
September) while Catmunan Reef is exposed during the northeast monsoon (November
Reef, whereas, only less than 50 individuals was observed in Tamisan Reef. However,
the latter data was excluded in the analysis. Results showed significant difference across
months with peak of recruitment from November to April covering two seasons in the
Philippines, namely: northeast monsoon and the first month of weak easterlies (AprilMay). The pattern observed did not coincide with the known recruitment pulse in the
Philippines which fall during the southwest monsoon and the second inter-monsoonal
place during the southwest monsoon, a non-breeding season for the species, through a
stepping stone processes. More importantly, its distribution was confined within the net
seawater mass movement during that period.


REVERSING THE DECLINE: MODELING TARGETED CONNECTIVITY IN BAHAMIAN ACROPORIDS (Abstract ID: 29865)
Knowledge of the physical pathways among coral reefs created by the movement of water
masses is usually considered essential for a causal explanation of the patterns of larval
dispersal, retention, recruitment, and connectivity. Consequently, understanding physical
pathways has implications not only for the design and the establishment of networks of
coral reef marine reserves, but also for the selection of locations for facilitating the recovery
of critically threatened broadcast spawners, such as elkhorn and staghorn corals. For this
purpose, we set up a new HYCOM configuration for The Bahamas regional circulation with
a 2km horizontal resolution and adapt the open-source Connectivity Modeling System to
acroporid larval transport. Detailed habitat maps from satellite imagery collected at different
spatial scales from 1-2m per pixel in some areas to 10-30m per pixel for the whole country
are used to create a realistic coral reef landscape for the coupled biophysical model. Climate
scenarios during years of contrasted hurricane occurrence serve to introduce maximum
range of variability in connections. Sensitivity analyses on the role of specific larval traits
and behaviors, such as swimming, increasing sinking rates with ontogeny, and temperaturerelated mortality rates, are performed to explore the detailed biophysical interactions that
lead to source and sink variability, dispersal barriers, and temporally stable settlement nodes.
We explore emerging temporal and spatial connectivity patterns and discuss results in the
view of coral rehabilitation in a changing climate.


BENEFITS AFFORDED TO REEF FISHES: GEAR RESTRICTIONS VERSUS REMOTENESS (Abstract ID: 28689)
It is well accepted that no take fishery closures provide refugia for fish and boost their
overall abundance and biomass. In developing countries where people rely heavily on
coastal resources for their daily subsistence, there is little evidence that no take areas are
fully complied with or are different to gear restricted areas. Over the past 15 years, we
monitored coral reef fish biomass from west to east Indonesia in response to management, including full fishing closures, fishing gear restrictions and in areas with no management. We also applied Indonesia national guidelines to rank the management effectiveness of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). Across 466 sites representing 19 MPAs, and 3
unmanaged remote areas, we found a gradient in fish biomass ranging from 40 kg ha-1 in
East Flores to 31,650 kg ha-1 in the remote area of Southwest Maluku. Across the gradient of sites from lowest to highest biomass we detected distinct changes in the trophic
composition due to the relative percentage of planktivores and omnivores increasing. We
also found full fishery closures had higher biomass than areas with gear restrictions, which
in turn were generally higher than areas open to fishing. We examined the relationship
between the management effectiveness rankings and fish biomass to see how well they
correlated. Although we found the highest reef fish biomass in remote areas, and in some
recently established MPAs, our study suggests that in areas close to human populations
management efforts are contributing to improvements in Indonesian fish stocks.


RESILIENCE-BASED MANAGEMENT OF CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS: PAST,
PRESENT AND FUTURE (Abstract ID: 28797)
The concept of resilience has been acknowledged as important to coral reef conservation for nearly three decades. However, we have struggled to demonstrate how resilience
theory can be implemented to inform coral reef planning and management. Recent
innovations in resilience-based management provide an approach to ecosystem-based
management that is forward-looking, holistic and adaptive in nature, and address both
current and future pressures including climate and non-climate threats. The NOAA Coral
Reef Conservation Program is working with many partners including The Nature Conservancy, the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, the United Nations Environment
Programme, academics and local managers around the world to advance the application
of resilience-based management. These activities include science and research to better
understand resilience, the development of data products and guidance to support the
identification of resilience indicators, resilience assessments, and incorporation of
resilience into planning and management decisions. Supporting resilience-based management is the priority of our climate-related work. This presentation will outline NOAA
and partner contributions to this body of work, and will highlight priority next steps and
progress made to integrate social and ecological resilience into coral reef management.



Acropora palmata is a key species conforming the structure of the Mesoamerican
Coral Reef (MCR), sadly, a combination of factors have put it on the edge of extinction.
258

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


FINE-SCALE TRANSCRIPTIONAL RESPONSES TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE
ENDANGERED CARIBBEAN STAGHORN CORAL ACROPORA CERVICORNIS
(Abstract ID: 27937)
Individuals adjust gene expression to acclimate to different stressors, while expression
variation among individuals represents raw material available for adaptation via natural
selection. Climate change will create more frequent sea surface temperature anomalies,
especially in marginal regions such as the Florida Keys, but it is unclear to what extent
hot and cold stressors will drive synergistic or antagonistic responses in individual coral
colonies, and whether the adaptive capacity of coral populations will be enhanced or
restricted due to periodic exposure to opposing temperature extremes. Taking advantage
of three coral restoration nurseries that serve as long-term artificial common garden
experiments, we exposed ten genetically distinctAcropora cervicornis colonies at each
nursery to ambient, hot, and cold temperatures seasonally and measured typical gene
expression responses using RNA-seq on pooled individuals. Targeting 21 genes of
interest, including those with synergistic or antagonistic responses to hot and cold, we
designed a high-throughput qPCR array to quantify expression in all 30 individuals under
each treatment: a total of 360 samples. This study represents one of the most comprehensive investigations into fine-scale transcriptional differences within a coral species to
date, and reveals extensive genetically- and environmentally-driven variation in acclimatory/adaptive capacity for a population endangered by climate change.

PATTERNS IN SOUNDSCAPES AROUND AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 29340)
Underwater soundscapes provide a wealth of information for resident, transient
and settling fauna often using these cues for a number of independent or associated
assess presence, abundance, and distribution of vocal species, anthropogenic activity
and resulting marine fauna responses. More recently, various acoustic components of a
soundscape are being investigated as an index of habitat condition. However, restricted
by technology, many previous studies relied on short-term sampling regimes, collecting
only brief acoustic snapshots, increasing the likelihood of drawing uncertain conclusions
on temporal patterns and soundscape composition. Over the last two decades, CMST
has collected over 500, near-continuous (typically 5 of 15 minutes) long-term recordings
at nearshore, offshore, reef and estuarine sites around Australia, collectively providing
over a decade of coverage at some sites. This presentation will discuss several examples
of soundscape spatial and temporal patterns in various biological contributions to
soundscapes on a range of scales, some displaying significant day-to-day variations (up
to shifts of hours between days). Many of these correlate with environmental drivers,
such as temperature, salinity, tide, light or dissolved oxygen etc. Possible implications for
short-term or snapshot datasets are discussed.


COLONIZATION AND SUCCESSION OF HAWAIIAN GOLD CORAL (KULAMANAMANA HAUMEAAE). (Abstract ID: 28750)
The Hawaiian gold coral is a parasitic zoanthid that colonizes other soft corals and
secretes a protein skeleton that over millennia can more than double the mean height
of the host colony. Visual surveys at 6 known coral beds in the Hawaiian Archipelago
found mature gold coral to be a dominate taxa at all but the geologically youngest site.
Less than 5% of the gold coral colonies seen were in the process of colonizing a host,
85% of the hosts of midas colonies with two thirds found at the younger site where
the mean height of bamboo coral was significantly greater than at other sites. Marked
midas colonies revisited after 5 and then 8 years showed the gold coral tissue spreading
across the host at a rate of roughly 2 cm per year. Despite the rapid change much of the
host skeleton is lost in the process of being subsumed. Cross-sections of mature gold
colonies indicated the host comprises an average of 9.8 cm of the core of the gold coral
stem. Midas colonies were notably absent from a bamboo coral assemblage growing on
a 76-yr-old wreck adjacent (~1 km) to a patch of mature gold colonies indicating settlement was infrequent. This time lag between the bamboo coral host and the gold coral
successor is essential because otherwise the speed of the midas phase would subsume
the host population faster than it could replenish.


SYSTEM FROM THE SEDIMENTARY RECORD (Abstract ID: 29383)
Studies of ecosystem fidelity have shown that time-averaged molluscan death assemblages in surface sediments are representative of the living community on decadal
scales. The assumption becomes that the death assemblage is preservable once buried
beneath the surface, and can be used to reconstruct the history of the reef/lagoon
system. Vibrocores through the entire sediment package (2-5m deep) revealed that the
modern seagrass community is poorly represented in the subsurface. The lagoon is
strongly bioturbated by callianassid shrimp that have reworked the sediment package
such that it is nearly devoid of molluscs. Instead, there is a thick shelly lag deposit atop
the Pleistocene substrate at the bottom of each core. Taxonomic analyses of the shells
in the lag do not match the surface seagrass death assemblage. Instead, they are strongly
skewed toward small infaunal bivalves matching open sandy environments in St. Croix
lagoons. These results suggest one of two scenarios: 1) The typical seagrass community
(epifaunal gastropods and larger, shallow infaunal bivalves) is not easily moved into the
subsurface by callianassids, but remains at the sediment-water interface and degrades; or
2) the seagrass ecosystem is a relatively recent environmental change following a 7,000yr
history of primarily open bioturbated sand. Applying taphonomic analyses to the mollusk assemblages avoids problems with taxonomic change over time. Taphonomy of the
surface mollusks versus lag deposits supports the hypothesis that the lagoon has been
dominated by open sand, not seagrass, throughout its history and therefore the lagoon
has undergone a recent change from open sandy bottom to seagrass.


A CASE STUDY IN GOOD GOVERNMENT: ORDNANCE REEF CORAL ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION PROJECT (Abstract ID: 29660 | Poster ID: 686)
Discarded military munitions (DMM) represent a risk to human health and safety as
well as the environment. Addressing these threats requires that a host of Federal entities
(both military and civilian), State and Local agencies, and community stakeholders work
together in a manner that maximizes efficiency and minimizes environmental impacts.
Overcoming community distrust and skepticism to fully empower stakeholders to
participate in public input sessions is crucial to ensuring effective community input and to
achieving positive resource outcomes. The Department of Defense (DoD) is responsible
for addressing the legacy of contamination associated with these munitions, including
unexploded ordnance (UXO) present from current and former testing and training ranges
and disposal of discarded military munitions (DMM). In an effort to evaluate remote
Operated Underwater Munitions Recovery System (ROUMRS) in July 2011 to recover
DoD, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the State
of Hawaii surveyed corals and munitions present in the area prior to initiation of the
recovery effort. This allowed for the demonstration project to be planned and executed in
manner that minimized injury to corals present. Post-recovery surveys documented injury
to corals that did occur and will allow for the design of a coral mitigation project appropriate for the injury that was identified. Details regarding the pre- and post- recovery surveys
and coral assessment and mitigation process will be presented


DIVERSITY AND FUNCTION OF VIRUSES IN CORAL REEF SPONGES (Abstract
ID: 28990)

259

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

made available to the public through summary reports via the REEF website. REEF also
provides raw data files upon request. Scientists from government agencies and academic
institutions use the REEF database to address management and conservation issues,
including fisheries assessments, evaluation of species trends, understanding ecological patterns, tracking non-native species, and identification of new species. Over forty
scientific publications have included REEF data. To ensure a high level of accuracy,
REEF staff have incorporated layers of quality assurance, including experience levels,
automated error checking during submission, and extensive post-processing. Several
recently published papers have developed analyses that capitalize on the power of the
data collected while addressing uncertainty. Based on experiences in the development,
cultivation, and expansion of the REEF program, I will discuss characteristics that
foster long-term participation and generation of data that have proven useful for marine
conservation and discovery.

Viruses are ubiquitous biological entities that regulate diverse biological processes.
However, despite their abundance, we have limited knowledge about how viruses
interact with marine invertebrate hosts, particularly with sponges, which are ecologically
important components of coral reef environments. As marine holobionts, sponges harbour dense communities of microorganisms and this high symbiont complexity makes
them an ideal model for studying host-virus interactions. Morphological and molecular
approaches were used to describe the diversity and function of viruses in some of the
most representative coral reef sponge species from the Great Barrier Reef and the Red
Sea. Sponge viruses were isolated from their hosts, viral metagenomes were sequenced
and taxonomic composition and function were assessed using a customized bioinformatic pipeline designed specifically for analysis of holobiont metaviromes. In addition,
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) was used to morphologically characterize the
viral particles and resolve their spatial location within the holobiont. Initial molecular
analyses indicate that sponges host a wide diversity of bacterial and eukaryotic viruses,
including abundant Caudovirales and representatives of Mimiviridae, Phycodnaviridae
and Iridoviridae. TEM analysis of different sponge species further revealed that distinct
icosahedral virus-like particles were associated with both sponge and bacterial cells. This
study highlights viruses as an important component of the sponge holobiont.



CO-MANAGEMENT TO ADDRESS LIVELIHOOD LINKED THREATS TO CORAL
REEFS – CASE STUDY FROM GULF OF MANNAR, SOUTHEASTERN INDIA
(Abstract ID: 29116)

MORPHOLOGICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF SPONGE-VIRUS ASSOCIATIONS
USING TRANSMISSION ELECTRON MICROSCOPY (Abstract ID: 29234 | Poster
ID: 498)

The fishers live along the coast of Gulf of Mannar depend mainly on the fishery
resources for their livelihood. Though reefs in Gulf of Mannar are protected, there is
good accessibility for coastal communities. The steady increase of population (34% in 15
years), crafts and competition forced them to diversify into shore seine fisheries, trap fishing and poaching of ornamental fishes in reef areas. The 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami
made the community significantly more aware of the importance of reefs. The increase
of additional livelihood options through eco development activities under various
national and international programmes like CORDIO, GCRMN, GEF-UNDP also helped
the fishers to reduce their dependence on the sea. However, nowadays the cultivation
of exotic seaweed, Kappaphycus alvarezii and seaweed collection in reef areas have
inflicted considerable damage to reefs. Due to invasion of exotic seaweed, about 1.2
Km2 reef areas have been affected and seaweed collection makes regular disturbances
to reefs.. These activities are not permitted as per Wildlife Protection Act of India and respective Government Orders, however the activities are linked to livelihood of over 600
fisher families and there was always conflicts between community and reef managers
on this issues. The Government through a GEF-UNDP project with 252 grass root level
organizations - Village Marine Conservation (VMC) and Eco Development Committees
(EDC) have been formed and loans are provided as revolving fund to enhance their
livelihood activities and to reduce pressure on reefs.

Viruses are among the most abundant organisms in marine ecosystems and play
important roles in several biological processes. In this context, sponges are likely to be an
important reservoir for viruses as they host a diverse array of macro and micro symbionts. Recent efforts have been made to improve and standardize methods for describing
microscopy (TEM) images – have limited our understanding of sponge-associated viral
communities. Here we assessed the efficacy of three different methods for TEM imaging
of sponge-associated viruses: i) Viral purification from host tissue by cell lysis followed
by ultracentrifugation in cesium chloride gradients to separate viruses based on density;
ii) Ultracentrifugation of homogenized host tissue in liquid media directly onto Formvarcoated electron microscopy grids and iii) Preparation of ultrathin sections from the host
tissue. To date, co-precipitates during ultracentrifugation have limited effective visualization of viruses although virus-like particles have been successfully observed in ultrathin
sections of sponge tissue. Furthermore we successfully imaged viral-host interactions
including the observation of inter- and intracellular viruses within the sponge holobiont.

ISLAND EROSION AND MIGRATION IN HATOHOBEI STATE, PALAU (Abstract ID:
28261 | Poster ID: 392)


For small island nations, global warming and climate change has prompted predictions
of disappearing islands swallowed by sea level rise. However, recent studies have shown
dynamic reef island conditions over time, indicating that the situation is not so simple.
Here, we assess the coastal changes on two remote and near-equatorial southwest
islands of Palau using satellite imagery, historical aerial/coastal photographs, and GPSbased land surveys. Hatohobei (or Tobi) is an oceanic island surrounded by fringing reef
and has experienced areas of both erosion and accretion of its coastal beach and land
in past decades. Helen Reef is a medium-sized protected coral atoll with a single small
sand spit island, an important turtle and bird nesting site. In the past 25 years Helen Reef
Island has changed slightly in size and shape, but more critically has migrated sufficiently
that only 10% of the island that was land in 1992 is still part of the present island. The
island has literally “left behind” most of its larger vegetation so that in the last 25 years its
general appearance has greatly changed. We examine changes of both islands relative to
natural conditions and human influences and have attempted to obtain precise data that
will allow detailed determination of changes in the future.

A NEW SPATIO-TEMPORAL RECORD OF BIOEROSION IN DEGLACIAL FOSSIL
REEF SEQUENCES FROM IODP EXPEDITION 325 CORES, GREAT BARRIER
REEF, AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 29133)
Bioerosion traces preserved in coral reef systems provide insight into past environmental conditions and reef health, however few studies have explored this in fossil
reefs. The International Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) Expedition 325 sampled
fossil Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) to deglacial (~10-30 ka) reef sequences off the
northwest continental shelf of the Great Barrier Reef. Presence of bioerosion traces
(ichnogenera: Entobia(Sponges), Gastrochaenolites (Bivalves) and Maeandropolydora/
Trypanites(Worms)) was quantified based on detailed core observations and highresolution 3D CT data from 14 drill holes from 3 cross-shelf transects within two regions,
Hydrographers Passage and Noggin Pass. A new high-resolution temporal record of
bioerosion activity was defined from the cores using a comprehensive chronologic
database. This new record, along with paleo-environmental interpretations derived from
coralgal assemblage data, were used to study multi-scale spatio-temporal patterns of
bioerosion across-shelf, along-shelf and within individual sites. Pooled bioerosion data
show temporal differences in relative abundance and intensity, which is consistent with


LESSONS LEARNED FROM A QUARTER CENTURY OF A SUCCESSFUL MARINE
CITIZEN SCIENCE PROGRAM (Abstract ID: 30027 | Poster ID: 721)
Since 1993, Reef Environmental Education Foundation (REEF) has coordinated the Volunteer Fish Survey Project, a citizen science program that engages divers and snorkelers
to collect data. REEF surveyors record all positively identifiable fish species, along with
categorical estimates of log-scale abundance. To date, approximately 16,000 volunteers
have submitted over 200,000 surveys. Collectively, the surveys include over 8.5 million
sightings records on over 3,400 species from 12,038 sites worldwide. All REEF data are

260

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

QS activity we also examined the functions of this new compound. The effects of these
naturally occurring QS inhibitors on bacterial regulatory networks potentially contribute
to the structuring of interactions within BBD consortia.

position of major reef sequence boundaries, including shallow reef death events. Bioerosion intensities vary between both regions possibly inferring distinct post-depositional
environmental settings. Finally, we discuss the influence of bioerosion on reef systems
during periods of rapid environmental change (last deglaciation) when environmental
conditions were very different from now.


WHAT IS THE BEST SCIENTIFIC JUSTIFICATION FOR MPAS ON CARIBBEAN
REEFS? (Abstract ID: 27853 | Poster ID: 653)


Marine protected areas (MPAs) are a common policy tool used for the conservation of
coral reefs worldwide. The scientific justification for MPAs is based on community-level
indirect effects of overfishing on the competitive interactions between seaweeds and
reef-building corals: more fishing, more seaweeds, less coral. Some have questioned
this justification for MPAs in the Caribbean, which has reefs that are distinct from those
found elsewhere in the tropics. We found an explicit indirect effect of overfishing on
competition between sponges and reef-building corals from surveys of 69 sites across
the Caribbean. Removal of sponge-eating angelfishes and parrotfishes resulted in > 3
fold increase in overgrowth of corals by sponges, with coral-sponge contact increasing
from 11.0% to 25.6%, and these sponges were mostly species palatable to sponge predators. Palatable sponge species have faster rates of growth or reproduction than defended
species, which instead make metabolically expensive chemical defenses. Surprisingly,
overfished sites had lower seaweed cover, contrary to prevailing assumptions about seaweed control by herbivorous fishes. Coral-sponge competition provides an unambiguous
justification for MPAs in the Caribbean, while seaweed cover does not.

ELECTRICAL NETWORK MODELING OF PERFORATE AND IMPERFORATE
CORAL PHYSIOLOGICAL PERFORMANCE UNDER ENVIRONMENTAL STRESS
(Abstract ID: 29066 | Poster ID: 355)
Scleractinian coral body plan potentially affects resource sharing and response to stress
that can lead to bleaching. We use electrical network models, where resistance, capacitance, voltage, and current have identifiable correlates with organism structures and
the environment. Perforate taxa share a common gastrovascular system connecting all
polyps. In imperforate taxa, a colony’s polyps are connected only to nearest neighbors (in
a hexagonal array) and only when the colony is expanded. We present microelectrode
data for dissolved oxygen inside and around imperforate (Montastraea cavernosa) and
perforate (Acropora cervicornis) colonies in no flow and flow conditions (colony Reynolds number = 4,000 and 10,000), and morphological data, used to estimate parameters
for a resistance-capacitance network model of mass transfer between colonies and the
environment. SPICE network simulations of the performance of perforate and imperforate models of colonies of varying size exhibit strikingly different dynamic behaviors to
environmental perturbations. Perforate coral colonies exhibit larger time constants, on
the order of many minutes, for response to environmental perturbation compared to imperforate species, which have faster system dynamics but uncouple neighboring polyps
from each other. A key parameter requiring further characterization is the mixing time
constant of the polyp coelenteron. Ecophysiological network models of resource sharing
are useful in predicting response to changing environmental conditions.



HYBRIDISATION AMONG GROUPERS (GENUS CEPHALOPHOLIS) AT THE
EASTERN INDIAN OCEAN SUTURE ZONE: TAXONOMIC AND EVOLUTIONARY
IMPLICATIONS (Abstract ID: 28560)

EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE AND SALINITY ON CORAL BLEACHING UNDER
Coral bleaching occurs when cell densities or/and cellular content of photosynthetic
pigments in zooxanthellae are decreased which may due to some environment stresses
espeacially under conditions of elevated temperature and low water salinity or a combination of these factors. To clarify the important role of temperature and salinity on coral
bleaching, this study has been conducted in the cauliflower coral, Pocilloporadamicornis
collected from Samaesan Island, Chonburi, Thailand. The same size of cauliflower
coral’s colonies were collected and placed in wide mouthed glass jar at temperature of
10, 20 and 33 psu. The percentage of bleaching in cauliflower coral’s colonies were
observed in conjunction with the cell densities of zooxanthellae in seawater of the glass
jar. Sampling cells were enumerated every 3 hours for 33 hours. High cell density of
zooxanthellae was found the glass jar seawater and coral bleaching (50% of coral colony)
coral colonies were bleached at 34 C in all salinity levels. These results suggested that
high temperature and low salinity play an important role on coral bleaching.

A suture zone in the eastern Indian Ocean is home to numerous hybridising species, providing an opportunity to determine how hybridisation affects speciation and biodiversity
in coral reef fishes. At this location, hybridisation between two grouper: Cephalopholis
the genetic basis of hybridisation, and to compare the ecology and life history of hybrids
and their parent species. This approach aimed to provide insights into the taxonomic
and evolutionary consequences of hybridisation. Despite clear phenotypic differences,
hybrids and their parent species were genetically homogenous within and (thousands of
kilometres) outside of the hybrid zone. Hybrids were at least as fit as their parent species
(in terms of growth, reproduction and abundance) and were observed in a broad range
of phenotypes. The two species appear to be interbreeding due to inherent biological
and ecological similarities and the lack of genetic structure may be explained by three
potential scenarios: 1) hybridisation and introgression; 2) discordance between colouration and genetics; and 3) incomplete lineage sorting. Further genetic analyses may be
necessary to distinguish these scenarios. Regardless, the two species are unlikely to
evolve in reproductive isolation as they cohabit at Christmas Island and will source congeneric mates at Cocos (Keeling) Islands. Our results suggest that hybridisation among
coral reef fishes is a dynamic evolutionary factor.



DECIPHERING CHEMICAL SIGNALING IN BLACK BAND DISEASE (Abstract ID:
29919)
Black Band Disease (BBD) is the first reported coral disease and the most widely
distributed polymicrobial disease of corals. In BBD, a polymicrobial disease consortium
dominated by the filamentous cyanobacteriumRoseofilum reptotaenium displaces members of the epibiotic microbiome. We investigated the natural products chemistry and
consortium, we identified lyngbic acid, a cyanobacterial secondary metabolite. It strongly
inhibited quorum sensing (QS) in the Vibrio harveyiQS reporters, which depend on the
novel malyngamide. Since malyngamides from other cyanobacteria are known to inhibit

ID: 28634)
The high latitude reefs of South Africa’s Maputaland coast are considered marginal as
they are at the extremes of coral distribution. They are, however, extremely vibrant and
biodiverse ecosystems with a high biodiversity including >90 hard and >40 soft coral
species. These corals occur at the lower ranges of their thermal tolerances and are
subject to significant seasonal variation, suggesting that they might have greater capacity
for thermal acclimation than tropical conspecifics. Indeed, the Maputaland reefs were

261

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

not affected by the global coral bleaching events in 1998 and 2010 that significantly
affected many other reefs in the Western Indian Ocean. The basis for this may lie in the
abilities of the corals to acclimate or could be due to local physical and oceanographic
features that reduce exposure to thermal stress. In order to investigate the potential for
acclimation to current and future stresses, representative local corals from the complex
(Acropora austera) and robust clade (Hydnophora exesa) were exposed to preindustrial,
current and future temperatures and pH in a multifactorial design. Physiological changes
highly diverse WIO and one of the few species from the robust clade to be sequenced.
As such they are also of great interest for evolutionary studies.

SOCMON CARIBBEAN AND COMPREHENSIVE INTEGRATED MONITORING
(Abstract ID: 27955)
The Caribbean node of the Global Socio-economic Monitoring Initiative for Coastal
Management (SocMon) has been developing regional capacity in socio-economic monitoring since 2003. Site assessments are tailored to site needs with study goals and objectives aligned to relevant management plans and/or management questions. Assessment
data are often compared to socio-economic and ecological secondary data in order to
better understand socio-economic impacts and explain trends in socio-economic characteristics. However, SocMon has never been deliberately incorporated into biophysical
monitoring until recently. SocMon is one of the most widely recognised methodologies for human dimensions monitoring in the Caribbean region due in part to (1) its
institutional base at the University of the West Indies, Barbados, and (2) the number of
sites at which it has been implemented. Consequently, large conservation organisations
and global monitoring initiatives recognise its value and have demonstrated interest in
incorporating the methodology as needed to achieve relevant resource conservation and
management goals. The Nature Conservancy’s (TNC) Eastern Caribbean Marine Managed Areas Network (ECMMAN) Project and the Caribbean arm of the Global Coral
Reef Monitoring Initiative (GCRMN-Caribbean) have both adopted SocMon as the
socio-economic monitoring methodology of choice for integrated coastal and coral reef
monitoring. This presentation demonstrates progress towards integrated comprehensive
monitoring in the region through the ECMMAN Project and GCRMN-Caribbean.



THE INFLUENCE OF HABITAT AND CONSPECIFIC ADULTS ON THE ABUNDANCE AND SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF JUVENILE CORALS (Abstract ID: 29941)
Despite an increased understanding of recruitment and population dynamics of stony
corals, there is a lack of knowledge on how various mechanisms may influence or create spatial patterns within a population, mainly due to methodological limitations. We
use photomosaic images created by stitching together thousands of individual images,
giving us the opportunity to look at how processes operate on a broader spatial scale. At
eight sites on the forereef of Palmyra Atoll, photomosaics (100 m2 in size) were used to
identify and digitize all juvenile (<5 cm diameter) and adult coral colonies. Using various
metrics such as density, percent cover, and the position of each colony, we examined
relationships between juveniles and adults in terms of abundance and spatial patterning.
Our results show that juvenile density is more strongly related to adult density rather
than adult percent cover (by genus). Additionally, we found that juveniles of some genera
were associated with specific habitat characteristics (consolidated versus unconsolidated
substrata). A look at the spatial relationship between juveniles and adults using mean
nearest neighbor distances shows three genera in which juveniles were clumped around
adults of the same genus, while all other genera were randomly distributed with respect
to adults. Using spatial patterns, this study provides insight into the potential role adult
reproduction and settlement preferences play on the early life stages of corals.

MASSIVE BLEACHING IN THE CORAL TRIANGLE: THE OCCURRENCE OF
SURFACE WARMING ANOMALIES AND POSSIBLE CONNECTION TO OTHER
PHYSICAL PARAMETERS (Abstract ID: 28138)
There have been two major recorded bleaching events in the Coral Triangle, in 1998
and 2010. Both events coincided with a La Nina event. However, we noted that other La
Nina events and anomalous warming have occurred between these two years with no
corresponding massive bleaching reports. This prompted this study which investigates the
patterns in the timing and extent of anomalies from 1997 to 2010 of some parameters
thought to be associated with coral bleaching occurrences. These parameters include
this parameter is said to be affected by ENSO and might provide additional insight to the
process that favors coral bleaching occurrence. Time-latitude plot of SST anomaly shows
a more extensive warming in the Coral Triangle in 1998 than 2010. Investigations show
an intense decrease in cloudiness and an increase in PAR can also be observed prior to
the intense increase in SST in those two years. A strong drop in the wind speed as the
ITCZ mean latitude shifts southwards is also seen to coincide with the 1998 and 2010
SST anomaly. The long duration of intense negative anomaly in ITCZ latitude position
likely hindered the monsoonal winds in the Coral Triangle in those times. We contend
therefore, that conditions of low cloud, high PAR, high SST, and low wind, favored the occurrence of mass coral bleaching. The combination of conditions can likely occur in the
Coral Triangle if a strong/moderate El Niño is followed by a strong/moderate La Niña.


POPULATION STRUCTURE AND MIGRATION PATTERNS OF THE CORALMUSSISMILIA HISPIDA ALONG THE SOUTHWESTERN ATLANTIC OCEAN (Abstract
ID: 29389 | Poster ID: 185)

Duke University, Unite, France
Center, Uni, USA

The Brazilian coast encompasses the only true coral reefs from the Southwestern
Atlantic Ocean, with a unique coral fauna characterized by low diversity and a high percentage of endemics. Mussismilia hispida is an endemic coral and one of the main reef
builders, having one of the broadest distributions along the coast. Although important,
there are no estimations of its population structure, even with reproductive asynchrony
being observed among localities. This study aimed at estimating the population structure
structured populations: Northern region (NR), Oceanic islands (OI), Central region (CR),
Southeastern region (SER) and Southern Limit (SL). Reproductive asynchrony does not
seem to explain the observed patterns of gene flow. The CR and OI were the most genetically diverse populations, while SL had the lowest diversity. The migration model that
best explained gene flow among populations was the one where OI exports migrants to
NR and CR, CR exports migrants to the OI and SER and the latter exports migrants to
the first study to assess population structure and gene flow of a coral species along the
Southwestern Atlantic coast using a highly variable marker. Results are useful for Brazilian coral reef conservation management strategies.

262

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

small controlled areas for recreational diving should be carried out instead of creating
new dive sites. Raising public awareness is required intensely for coral reef conservation
in Thailand in the period of increasing human and climate change impacts.

CORAL REEFS AND PEOPLE IN A HIGH CO2 WORLD: WHERE CAN SCIENCE
MAKE A DIFFERENCE TO PEOPLE? (Abstract ID: 27858)
Increasing levels of CO2 put shallow water coral reefs, and the people who depend
upon them at risk from two key global stresses: elevated sea surface temperature, and
ocean acidification. These global stresses cannot be avoided by local management,
compound local stresses and hasten the loss of ecosystem services. Impacts to people
will be most grave where human dependence on coral reefs is high, sea surface temperature reaches critical levels soonest, and ocean acidification levels are most severe.
Where these elements align, swift action will be needed to protect people’s lives and
livelihoods. Designing policies to offset potential harm to coral reefs and people requires
a better understanding of where CO2-related global stresses could cause the most
severe impacts. To identify where people are at risk and where more science is needed,
we integrate spatially-explicit indicators from biological, physical and social sciences
to map human dependence on the coral reefs and the globally-driven threats to corals
from a high-CO2 world. Western Mexico, Micronesia, Indonesia and parts of Australia
have high human dependence and will likely face severe combined threats. As a region,
Southeast Asia is particularly at risk. These areas require new data and interdisciplinary
scientific research to help coral reef-dependent human communities better cope with,
prepare for, and adapt to increasing atmospheric CO2. Many of the countries most
dependent upon coral reefs are also the countries for which we have the least robust
data on ocean acidification.

COLONY SIZE AND STRUCTURE AS DETERMINANTS OF HABITAT USE AND
FITNESS OF CORAL-DWELLING FISHES (Abstract ID: 27951)
Competition for space affects patterns of habitat use and individual performance of
coral-dwelling fishes; however, the physical attributes of corals that influence habitat
preferences are uncertain. We investigated the influence of coral colony size and branching structure on habitat use and growth rate of two coral gobies, Gobiodon histrio and
Gobiodon erythrospilus. First, we examined two key aspects of coral colony structure,
interbranch depth and interbranch width that may influence habitat preferences. We
then used laboratory and field-based experiments to test the effects of coral species,
coral colony size and branching structure on habitat preference and growth rates of two
spathulata. A laboratory experiment demonstrated that both gobies preferred colonies
occupying this alternative habitat. Our results show that coral physical attributes are
important factors driving habitat preference of coral-dwelling gobies; however, there
must also be additional factors that influence their habitat use. Declining average coral
size and reduced habitat complexity on coral reefs could have significant impacts on the
performance of fishes.


WHAT’S A CLEAN BEACH WORTH: RECREATIONALIST WILLINGNESS TO PAY
FOR COASTAL WATER QUALITY AND ATTRIBUTES (Abstract ID: 29662)
Like many places across the world, corals in Hawaii are under threat from anthropogenic
degradation, with significant economic costs to human welfare. To understand the economic implications of coral reef degradation in Hawaii’s coastal waters, we undertook a
non-market valuation. We used a discrete choice experiment to capture recreationalists’
preferences for coastal water, coral, and fish attributes. Each attribute had three levels
(low, medium, and high). We conducted in-person surveys with 263 beach users from
June-November 2014 across a representative sample of Oahu’s beaches staffed by
lifeguards. For each beach visit, analysis of a mixed logit model suggests an individual is
willing to pay approximately $17.17 to reduce days of bacterial exceedance from 11 to
5 per year, a further $19.76 to reduce it to no bacterial exceedances at all. WTP to move
from 15 ft to 30 ft of underwater visibility was $29.99, a further $9.85 to increase from
30 ft to 60 ft. Respondents were willing to pay $13.97 to improve coral reef cover from
10% to 25%, a further $3.75 to improve to 45% cover. WTP for moving from 9 species
in the environment to 18 species in terms of fish diversity was $11.79, a further $0.82 to
increase that to 27 fish species. Our results provide critical information for resource managers and policy makers about the economic costs of water quality and coral decline.
While dollar amounts may not fully represent the richness of natural resources and the
diversity of ecosystems, valuation can help ensure environmental goods are considered
alongside competing interests


CONDITION ASSESSMENT OF CORAL REEFS OF TWO MARINE PROTECTED
AREAS UNDER DIFFERENT REGIMES OF USE IN THE NORTH-WESTERN
CARIBBEAN (Abstract ID: 28359 | Poster ID: 631)
We assess the conditions of reefs of two MPAs in the Caribbean: Guanahacabibes
National Park (GNP), Cuba and Costa Occidental Isla Mujeres-Punta Cancun-Punta
Nizuc National Park (CNP), Mexico, in 2014. The reefs (two per MPA) undergo different
diving intensities. The indicators analyzed for corals in transects of 10 m were cover,
diameter of colonies and old and recent mortality. The abundance of coral recruits and
black sea urchin were assessed in 1m2 quadrats and the cover of macroalgae in 25x25
cm quadrats. We detected different stages of the path that have been following the Caribbean reefs to a change in dominance of coral species and the deterioration of the 3-dimensional structure. Cuevones (closed to tourism for 15 years) in CNP seems to remain
dominated by corals, with high cover (33.36%), but with a species dominance (headed
by Porites astreoides), different from the observed in Caribbean reefs few decades ago.
Reefs of GNP subjected to a low diving intensity appear to be experiencing the beginning of a shift phase to be dominated by macroalgae. However, the coral cover remains
similar to previous reports (Yemaya 18.3%, Laberinto 12.1% ) and the density of recruits
(Yemaya 5.02 recruits/m2, Laberinto 4.67 recruits/m2 ) was high, typical of healthy
reefs, so there may still be hope of conservation for these sites. Manchones, CNP,
showed the lowest coral cover (11.49%) and the lowest recruit density (0,6 recruits/m2),
probably due to the joint action of natural pressures that Caribbean reefs are subjected
and to the heavy influx of visitors the reefs receive.


MANAGING RECREATIONAL DIVING IN TEMPORARY CLOSURES FOLLOWING THE 2010 CORAL BLEACHING EVENT IN THE ANDAMAN SEA (Abstract ID:
29302 | Poster ID: 662)
The severe coral bleaching events have led to coral mortality in many dive sites of
Thailand. This study focused on appropriate management strategies for degraded recreational dive sites following the 2010 coral bleaching event in a marine national park in
the Andaman Sea. Management strategies for recreational dive sites that were proposed
and implemented were prevention of coral damage from snorkeling in the shallow reefs
through the use of life vests, reduction of sediment load from coastal development and
wastewater discharges, temporary closure of selected dive sites, establishing new dive
sites, conducting research and monitoring program for coral conservation and restoration and establishing effective networks of relevant agencies. Popular dive sites in marine
national parks have been temporarily closed since 2010, in order to build resilience and
to enhance coral recovery. The long-term coral reef monitoring program showed that
live coral covers at both dive sites increased slightly over the last five years. However,
coral recruitment rates were low. As numbers of recreational divers in the Andaman Sea
are increasing, the Mu Ko Similan National Park management are considering establishing new dive sites in the park. However we recommend that active coral restoration in


VARIABILITY OF CORAL REEF PRIMARY PRODUCTION AND CALCIFICATION
COMPLICATES SCALING UP RATES ON HERON ISLAND REEF FLAT IN SOUTHERN GREAT BARRIER REEF, AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 28419 | Poster ID: 109)

263

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Measuring and monitoring primary production (P) and calcification (G) of coral reefs
has become increasingly important to understand how and why coral reefs are changing
due to natural and human factors. This study assessed three sites with different surface
cover composition within the western reef flat around Heron Island, southern Great
Barrier Reef to test flow respirometry methods to measure net primary production and
calcification in July 2015. Differences in P and G were apparent between sites measured,
which could be explained by differences in benthic community composition. Net P and
G were highest for the live coral dominated areas to the north-west of the island with
-137.24 mmol C m^2/hr and 38.04 mmol CaCO3 m^2/hr, respectively. East of the
island, was second highest with –72.61 mmol C m^2/hr and 9.26 mmol CaCO3 m^2/
hr, and was characterized by sandy area with patches of coral, macroalgae, and microphytobenthos. The lowest net P and G rates were directly south of the island with –11.45
mmol C m^2/hr and 0.45 mmol CaCO3 m^2/hr, which is a sandy area with sparse
live coral, macroalgae, and microphytobenthos. Due to variability in reef metabolism
and calcification which are dependent on benthic community type, care must be taken
for scaling processes across entire reef systems that do not account for such variability
within a geomorphic zone. This presentation will further discuss alternative approaches
to linearly upscaling field measurements through application of a model to estimate
variable rates of primary productivity and calcification.

SIZING UP METABOLIC HETEROGENEITY AT SINGLE CELL LEVEL: TOWARDS
A FUNCTIONAL UNDERSTANDING OF OPTICAL MICRONICHES IN CORAL
SYMBIOSIS (Abstract ID: 28904 | Poster ID: 94)
Tropical marine ecosystems based on reef-building corals are among the most productive marine ecosystems on Earth. At the heart of the success of corals as ecosystem
is their mutualistic symbiosis with dinoflagellate algae from the genus Symbiodinium
– which provides enormous amounts of energy to the anthozoan host. Previous
studies have revealed the presence of steep light gradients in tissues of corals. Yet, it
is unknown whether such resource stratification allows for physiological differences of
Symbiodinium across optical microniches within coral tissues. In this talk, we emphasize
the potential of combining single cell metabolomics with stable isotope labelling and
microsensors measurement to study the metabolic activity of individual Symbiodinium
cells along microscale gradients of light within coral tissue. Our results demonstrate
the functional diversity of Symbiodinium along microscale gradients in the coral tissue,
where carbon fixation varied about six-fold depending on the local light levels. Further,
our data suggest substantial differences in light utilisation efficiency along the coral
tissue light microgradient. These results could have important consequences for coral
responses to environmental stress as they suggest the presence of physiologically distinct populations of Symbiodinium, that could act as a reservoir of variation, providing
selective advantage to corals exposed to or recovering from environmental stress.


MORPHOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF OTOLITH SHAPE VARIATION IN SIGANUS
FUSCESCENS (HOUTTUYN, 1782) FROM THE WEST AND NORTHERN PHILIPPINE SEA (Abstract ID: 29033 | Poster ID: 250)


CHANGING DYNAMICS OF CORAL REEF CARBONATE PRODUCTION AND
IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE REEF GROWTH POTENTIAL (Abstract ID: 27816)

Otolith shape is affected by several factors including fish growth, genetic variations, and
diverse environmental conditions. As such, otolith shape analyses have proven to be a
