point where everyone agreed on intervention, however, was not a simple process. It
required on-going effort and investment to overcome beliefs that these were natural
processes and we should let nature take its course. Changing the management paradigm
was assisted by targeted research and monitoring and by completing a resilience plan to
identify those management actions we could take that would have the greatest benefit
to the nesting green turtles. Ultimately, it came down to the management agencies being
prepared to accept the risk of intervening; recognising that it would be difficult to make
the situation much worse; to make decisions in the absence of perfect data and committing to and implementing a recovery plan for Raine Island.

FISHING WHAT’S LEFT: IMPACTS OF FISHING ON TROPHIC STRUCTURE OF
REEF FISHES (Abstract ID: 29129)
Intensive fishing is believed to result in disequilibrium in ecosystem function with cascading impacts on the trophic structure of a marine system. Fishing tends to target largesized top trophic level species due to size and market value. Fishery removal of large
carnivores may result in increased abundance or biomass of lower trophic level species.
In this study, we used information from underwater fish visual census and focus group
discussions with fishers from over 20 localities across the Philippines to assess impacts
of fishing on trophic structure of reef fishes and with emphasis on reef protection. Initial
analyses show that density and biomass proportion of carnivorous species were relatively lower than herbivores in heavily fished sites, with few exceptions but represented
by small-sized non-targeted carnivores, while the otherwise is observed in low fished
areas or protected reefs. Density and biomass of fishery-targeted fish families were
significantly low in heavily fished areas. Mean trophic level in these heavily identified
sites have relatively low trophic index, suggesting that target fishes belong to small size
class regardless of trophic level. High mean trophic level index in protected reefs suggest
that no fishing preserve the interaction between trophic groups highlighting the need
for management to conserve resources and sustain coral reef fisheries. The impacts of
intensive fishery removal of biomass and the complex process of trophic interactions
across larger spatial scale need to be investigated further.

NOAA PIFSC , USA
PIFSC , USA


EXAMINING PATTERNS OF BRACHYURAN CRAB DIVERSITY ACROSS US PACIFIC CORAL REEFS USING AUTONOMOUS REEF MONITORING STRUCTURES
(Abstract ID: 29515 | Poster ID: 59)
Coral reefs are the most biologically diverse of all marine ecosystems. However, current
understanding and assessment of reef systems is largely limited to the well-known and
accessible biota, especially fishes and corals. The majority of reef diversity is comprised
of small cryptic invertebrates living within its complex architecture. Autonomous Reef
Monitoring Structures (ARMS) were developed as a systematic and standardized tool
to assess and monitor the understudied cryptobiota. Here we examine the abundance,
diversity and distribution of brachyuran crabs recovered from ARMS units deployed
environmental, and anthropogenic gradients.

THE IMPACT OF HETEROTROPHIC FEEDING ON THE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE
CORAL HOST AND THE ASSOCIATED SYMBIONT UNDER DIFFERENT NUTRIENT ENRICHMENT CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 28655)
Localised enrichment of dissolved inorganic nutrients are a considerable threat to coral
reefs and have been associated with reduced diversity, abundance, and physiological
tolerance. Past studies have often focussed on the influence of dissolved inorganic
nutrients on the harboured zooxanthellae or the host coral, while the combined effects
of heterotrophic feeding and dissolved inorganic nutrient uptake on the physiology of

282

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

both the host and symbiont remains understudied. To investigate these effects, we exposed corals associated with Symbiodinium sp. (clade C) to different levels of dissolved
inorganic nitrogen (DIN) and phosphate (P). Specifically, we studied the response to low
nutrient (low DIN: low P), nutrient replete (high DIN: high P), and imbalanced (high DIN:
low P) conditions. After long-term acclimation to the different nutrient environments
and feeding regimes, the density of Symbiodinium cells, their neutral lipid accumulation,
and fluorescent host pigment content were measured as proxies of nutrient stress. Our
results indicate a change in physiological condition of both the host coral and symbiont
which may be exacerbated by feeding in nutrient enriched conditions, and could significantly impact on the functioning of the coral-alga symbiosis, and the resilience of the
holobiont during temperature stress events.

DO THE SHUFFLE: CHANGES IN SYMBIODINIUM CONSORTIA THROUGHOUT
JUVENILE DEVELOPMENT (Abstract ID: 29636)
Previous studies of symbiotic associations between scleractinians corals and Symbiodium have demonstrated that hosts alter the consortium of symbionts in response to
environmental conditions. However, less is known about symbiont shuffling during early
development in corals, particularly for brooding species. This study examined whether
Symbiodinium consortia varied (1) in Porites astreoides on shallow (10m) and upper
mesophotic (30m) reefs, (2) changed during coral development and (3) influence growth
of juveniles in different environments. Symbiodinium ITS2 sequences were amplified
A, phylotypes A and B, or phylotypes A, B, and C and the frequency of the phylotype
composition did not vary with depth. However, phylotype A was the dominant symbiont
vertically transmitted to the planula. The presence of phylotypes B and C was detected
in juveniles transplanted onto the shallow and upper mesophotic reef but not when
harboring different combinations of Symbiodinium phylotypes did not vary. These results show that Symbiodinium consortia change during development and are influenced
by environment.


SYNTHESIZING GEOCHEMICAL AND GROWTH BANDING PROXIES FROM
GREAT BARRIER REEF CORAL RECORDS (Abstract ID: 28894 | Poster ID: 8)
The growth response of reef-building corals to past environmental conditions is the
subject of ongoing discussion, and could help researchers better anticipate the impacts
of current climate change on reef health. In their skeletal banding, corals preserve a
record of growth changes in response to past climate variability. Previous studies have
used geochemical methods or growth banding analysis as coral paleoclimate proxies.
However, few studies have combined these approaches, which would provide more
comprehensive insight into the historical impact of environmental variability on coral
growth. Our study combines geochemical analysis (δ18O, δ13C, and Sr/Ca) with
luminescence and density measurements on five corals of the genus Porites from the
Great Barrier Reef. These measurements track sea surface temperature, salinity, runoff,
and coral growth at monthly resolution from ~1971 to 2008. The coral geochemistry
tracks seasonal changes in climate, including temperature and precipitation, that vary
with El Niño and La Niña events. These results allow us to evaluate the variable timing
of density banding in relation to seasonal temperature extremes and highlight the role
of location, such as proximity to rivers, in capturing a regionally representative climate
signal. Our work establishes a methodology for multi-century coral paleoclimate records
and demonstrates the value of combined datasets in coral climate reconstructions.
These results lay the groundwork for much longer, paired reconstructions of climate and
coral growth variability.


PROTECTING THE GREAT BARRIER REEF IN THE 21ST CENTURY: MANAGING
COMPLEXITY AND RISK IN UNCERTAINTY (Abstract ID: 28948)
The greatest long-term risk to the Great Barrier Reef is global climate change. Regionally, the greatest policy challenge is to measure and respond to the many factors, in addition to climate change, which lower the resilience of the Great Barrier Reef and prevent
its recovery from long-term decline in areas of highest pressure. While existing approaches to environmental impact assessment and marine spatial planning are providing
positive protection benefits, they are insufficient. Many of the current pressures began
last century and recent monitoring shows a resilient system, that while stable in some
areas, is in long-term decline in others. Future environmental management will need new
measures. At ecosystem scale, delivering conservation outcomes is not a linear set of
steps taken by a few agents. The Authority and its partners will build a comprehensive
monitoring and reporting system to inform on progress against the Reef 2050 Plan, and
are now developing policies to guide future actions. These will redefine how activities
are managed in the Reef region and guide responses to cumulative impacts. Building on
a strong foundation of existing protection measures, new tools will include measures for:
achieving reef recovery rather than halting decline; increasing knowledge of cumulative
effects and building responses that are multi-sector and multi-jurisdictional; and increasing public awareness and knowledge of the factors affecting the Reef and options for
building the Reef’s resilience.

edu

Germany
Germany
Germany

RESILIENCE OF A UNIQUE MESOPHOTIC REEF IN THE GULF OF MEXICO,
USA: A 30-YEAR HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE OF THE CORAL COMMUNITIES
AT PULLEY RIDGE REEF (Abstract ID: 28799)
A five-year study was funded by NOAA (“Connectivity of the Pulley Ridge - South
Florida Coral Reef Ecosystem”) to understand coral ecosystem connectivity in the
southeastern United States, from mesophotic reefs at Pulley Ridge (PR) in the Gulf of
Mexico to the shallow water reefs in the Florida Keys. This paper uses these data from
ROV photographic transects over a four year period (2012-2015) to characterize the
scleractinian coral community at Pulley Ridge mesophotic reef and to compare the coral
community with historical surveys completed in 1980s and 2003. Our ROV surveys in
2012-15 document a biologically diverse and dense community dominated by algae
catastrophic 93% loss of coral on main PR since 2003 (mean coral cover from 12.83% to
0.82%). However, in 2015 additional surveys discovered dense populations of argaricid
corals outside of the PR Habitat Area of Particular Concern (HAPC) where average
coral density was 18.46 colonies m^-2 (3.5% mean coral cover; max. 6.8%). Overall PR
a relatively small percentage had signs of White Syndromes disease (mean 1.0%, max
4.04%) or bleaching (mean 0.76%, max 3.03%). Potential causes for the coral loss include
cold water upwelling, hurricanes, disease, and river runoff. Kernel Smoothing Model in
ArcGIS was used to plot the new coral distribution and was used in part to support a

EFFECTS OF MICROPLASTIC EXPOSURE ON GROWTH AND SURVIVAL RATES
OF SCLERACTINIAN CORALS INFERRED WITH 3D SCANNING (Abstract ID:
28703)
they are considered to be a major threat to marine ecosystems. As these plastic particles
are mainly of terrestrial origin, coastal ecosystems, such as coral reefs are particularly
threatened. Previously it has been shown that scleractinian corals ingest microplastic
particles. However, little is known about their subsequent effects on health and survival
of the coral holobiont. Thus, the influence of microplastics (polyethylene, size 35 to 650
µm) on scleractinian corals (Acropora, Pocillopora and Porites) was examined in a series
of fully controlled lab experiments. In particular, we studied the reactions of different
coral species to particle contact. By the application of high-end 3D scanning and 3D
model analyses coral growth was monitored. The species responded differently to microplastic exposure. Corals overgrew, took up and rejected plastic particles. Our preliminary
results further indicate that microplastic exposure causes a decline in growth and

283

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

survival. We suggest that the exposure to microplastics leads to a reduction of energy
reserves as handling of particles is energetically costly for the coral. Moreover, microscopical observations of the particles showed a strong bacterial load that can promote
pathogen invasion. This is the first detailed monitoring of scleractinian corals from three
different genera showing the adverse impacts of microplastic exposure, calling for further
investigations of the effects of microplastics on the integrity of the coral holobiont.

ARE CORAL REEFS VICTIMS OF THEIR OWN PAST SUCCESS? (Abstract ID: 29241)
Sea-level fluctuations have been a driving force in community assembly of coastal
ecosystems. For example, only ~20 thousand years ago all places where coral reefs grow
today were emerged. In this talk we discuss the geological history of one of the most
prolific reefbuilders in modern reefs, the staghorn corals. We demonstrate that these
corals have a long and diverse history in the fossil record. The earliest representatives
are of Paleocene age, and most of the present-day taxonomic groups were already
present in the Late Miocene, long before the intensification of sea-level fluctuations as
the result of the waxing and waning of continental glaciations. By evaluating the occurrence of staghorn coral dominated deposits in the geological record we demonstrate
that even though the staghorn corals were highly diverse, they only contributed a small
portion to the coral assemblages during the Miocene and Pliocene. Only following the
onset of large-scale sea-level change in the early Pleistocene staghorn coral dominated
units become abundant in both the Indo-Pacific and West Atlantic reef provinces. High
growth rates and propagation by fragmentation has favored staghorn corals since this
time. In contrast, staghorn corals are among the most vulnerable corals to anthropogenic
stressors, with dramatic global loss of abundance worldwide. With continued decline in
staghorn coral abundance, the mounting challenges from both local anthropogenic stress
and climate change will limit the ability for coral reefs to provide ecosystem services.

SANSIBARICUS ACROSS VERTICAL GRADIENTS IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC
(Abstract ID: 29819)
The zoantharian Zoanthus sansibaricus is widely distributed in the western Pacific from
the intertidal zone to depths of more than 50 m. Research has indicated there is diversity
in its association with endosymbiotic Symbiodinium spp., but fine-scale investigations
across both depth gradients and geographic ranges are needed clarify the distribution
of this diversity, as well as provide a basis for discussing the wide range of habitats
and depths over which the host species thrives. In this study, we collected specimens
from subtropical Okinawa, Japan, and tropical Palau, from the intertidal zone to >30 m.
Molecular phylogenetic data from the non-coding region of the plastid mini-circle and
other markers were contrasted between the primary locations, as well as a smaller set
in <5 m hosted two different species of Symbiodinium, while deeper colonies (>10 m)
hosted another, different species, with transplant experiments suggesting no switching
or shuffling between ‘deep’ and ‘shallow’ Symbiodinium. In Palau, shaded intertidal
colonies in unique notch habitats hosted the same Symbiodinium as colonies from 20
limited but important flexibility in its Symbiodinium associations, allowing it to exist in a
variety of environments, and 2) the partitioning of Symbiodinium is driven primarily by
micro-environmental light levels.



INTEGRATIVE ANALYSIS OF SUSTAINABLE TRAJECTORIES IN HEAVILY USED
INDONESIAN CORAL REEF SYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 29555)
Many coral reefs in Indonesia are overexploited and heavily impacted by direct and
indirect human use. The Spermonde Archipelago in the south-west of Sulawesi has about
70 small islands and is an example of such a heavily impacted system. The archipelago
is situated off Makassar city, which, with its over 1.5 million inhabitants is an important
regional centre for exporting sea products. Most of Spermonde’s islands are densely
populated. Fishing is the main source of income, and fishers employ over 20 gear types,
targeting a wide range of species. Gear types differ in their impact on the reef ecosystem
and in the social networks fishers work, either within the patron-client system which limits
their decision-making options, or as more independent entrepreneurs. We will present an
overview of a long-term, multi- and interdisciplinary approach to analyse the development of the Spermonde Archipelago reefs and focus on the drivers of system dynamics
under multiple environmental and social conditions. Overall results show: a) the use of
a wide variety of gears as well as the prevalence of destructive fishing methods, b) clear
temporal changes in target species indicating changes in demand as well as in resource
availability, and c) gradients in biotic community compositions and processes as well as
physical conditions. Results are integrated into a spatially explicit simulation model and
are holistically analysed in their feedback relations under multiple stressors to identify
drivers of systems dynamics and pathways for sustainable marine resource management

NUTRIENT STIMULATION OF EXUDATES FROM DOMINANT CORAL REEF
PRODUCERS AND IMPACTS ON MICROBIAL BIOFILMS (Abstract ID: 29789 |
Poster ID: 139)
Shifts in reef benthic communities from calcifiers to fleshy algae have been documented on
reefs worldwide. While it is well established that these phase-shifts have severe consequences for ecosystem services, the impacts of shifting benthic structure on reef microbial
ecology is an area of active research because microbes recycle nutrients and are symbionts
of corals. We hypothesized that differences in the dissolved organic matter (DOM) exudates
of reef primary producers may determine the characteristics of conditioning films that
provide the basis of marine biofilm formation necessary for larval settlement. We subjected
four dominant benthic producers of tropical reefs – 1) corals, 2) macroalgae, 3) sedimentassociated microphytobenthos and 4) rubble-encrusting algae (primarily CCA and turfs) - to
two levels of nitrate and phosphate over several weeks. We characterized the community
composition of biofilms using metagenomics and the composition of DOM using bulk
elemental analysis and fluorescence spectroscopy. Dissolved organic carbon and nitrogen
increased with nutrient enrichment on all substrate types; corals also exhibited increased organic concentrations in control (unenriched) treatments. DOM exudates from each substrate
type were compositionally distinct from ambient water and enriched in fluorescent regions
that indicate differential production of organic compounds by corals and algae in response
to nutrients. Our results advance understanding of marine biofilm formation and organic
production and consumption dynamics on reefs undergoing community shifts.


SURVIVAL AND GROWTH MONITORING OF TRANSPLANTED CORALS IN SPECIAL RESERVE, REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES (Abstract ID: 29305 | Poster ID: 481)
A large-scale coral reef restoration project was conducted in the Cousin Island, to recover
coral loss due to massive bleaching from the 1998 El Nino-Indian Ocean Dipole event and
coral breakage from the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. Using the “coral gardening” concept,
first, we harvested coral fragments from donor colonies or corals of opportunity in nearby
284

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

areas and reared them in mid-water rope nurseries for about 1 to 2 years. Secondly, in
March 2013 corals of which: Pocillopora grandis and Acropora cytherea were transplanted
washout when cement is applied underwater. In March 2014, after allowing corals enough
time to attach, a monitoring was initiated 1 year after transplantation ensuring that we are
measuring the net growth rate. 35 colonies of each species were tagged in 2 plots (#6 and
#7) distant of 20m at 9m depth. In April 2015 another monitoring was realised after 14
cytherea respectively in plot #6 and #7. A sand movement could however increase the
mortality in plot 7. The change in ecological volume index using the formula as per Shafir
outcome shows favorable results of survival rate with a transplantation with cement.

and the 1997-98 events, when thermal anomalies were similar or even lower than those
observed in 2015. We monitored four reef areas from July 2015 to January 2016, analyzing the status of over 200 tagged colonies and quantifying coral community structure
in transects of 25 x 1 m. In addition, we surveyed over 20 locations in October 2015, to
quantify bleaching at the peak of the event. Although historical records indicated that
loss of coloration in years of excessive warming was noticed since August, actually the
first damaged corals were seen until early October, and bleaching affected less than 30%
of the colonies of Pocillopora and Porites. By January 2016 no discolored corals were
observed, and comparisons of ecological indices between July and January showed
no significant differences in any site. The delay in timing of the damage, the lower than
expected incidence of bleached corals and the minimal mortality detected, indicates
that reef corals in the southern Gulf of California are much more tolerant to excessively
warm waters that they were in past decades. We suggest that repeated bleaching events,
low population sizes, and high connectivity among populations, have served to facilitate
adaptation of corals to thermal stress.



ALTERING THE CALCIFYING FLUID STOICHIOMETRY INFLUENCES THE RATE
AND MORPHOLOGY OF CALCIUM CARBONATE PRODUCTION (Abstract ID:
29362)

BUTTERFLYFISH-MONOGENEAN INTERACTIONS: FROM BIOGEOGRAPHY TO

The calcifying fluid presents one of the most elusive areas of the calcifying processes
among marine biota due to the often-impenetrable ability to measure the process in
situ. Therefore, chemo-static growth experiments were conducted at fixed pH (8.7) and
super-saturation (omegaaragonite = 10), while varying the Mg2+, Ca2+, and carbonate stoichiometry. The CaCO3growth rate and crystal morphology is strongly depended on the
solution stoichiometry. At a constant super-saturation, the growth rate was highest when
the solution concentration ratio, r = [Ca2+]/[carbonate], equalled 0.0625 (1:16) without
Mg2+, growth rate decreased when r = 1 without Mg2+, and no difference was observed
between the different stoichiometry of Ca2+, and carbonate when various concentrations
of Mg2+ were incorporated. Corresponding to the stoichiometry a number of different

Interactions between hosts and parasites have been rarely studied in coral reefs and
represent a major feature for the evolution, adaptation and ecology of interacting species. We studied the biogeography of gill monogenean parasites from 27 butterflyfish
species in the South Pacific and our results show a conserved parasitism pattern over
space, with clear differences between sympatric butterflyfish species. Among the 27
analyzed species, only Chaetodon lunulatus, was never parasitized. Although butterflyfish
ecology has been extensively studied, parameters explaining parasite specificity between
sympatric butterflyfish species are not well understood. Fish mucus is often described
as the first line of defense against external attacks and several molecules with protective
roles have been characterized. To study the possible chemical role in the specificity of
monogeneans we studied the gill mucus of several butterflyfish species. First of all, we
displayed a decreased number of monogeneans. Then, we developed a non-targeted
metabolomic approach to study the chemical fingerprint from gill mucus of several
butterflyflish species with significant differences in their parasite loads. Results show
differences in chemical composition between different Chaetodon species, but also
between different ecological traits like diet and genetics. Finally, differences were found
between parasitized and non-parasitized fish and further analysis are being performed to
identify the responsible molecules.


HOW CORAL REEF TRADE DATA CAN HELP INFORM POLICY DECISIONS
(Abstract ID: 29519 | Poster ID: 696)
Recent ESA petitions have sparked intense debate within governments and the conservation community about industries that trade in these petitioned coral reef species. One
of these industries is the marine aquarium trade, which has grown into a major global
enterprise. Since the 1990s, the aquarium hobby has rapidly shifted focus from fish-only
systems to miniature reef ecosystems. Millions of marine fishes and invertebrates, including corals, are removed from coral reefs and associated habitats each year for sale to
home aquarists. Data collection for non-CITES-listed species is not mandatory and thus
data are often nonexistent. Furthermore, CITES trade data are often confounded and/
or confusing, and this lack of accurate and timely information about trade pathways,
volume, and species diversity makes it nearly impossible to understand or to manage
the trade sustainably, let alone inform the ESA petitions process. Here we examine the
open-access Marine Aquarium Biodiversity and Trade Flow online database (https://
of this trade and to effectively communicate this deepened understanding. We examine
trade data for the Banggai cardinalfish (Pterapogon kauderni), the anemonefishes
how trade data can be used to inform policy decisions and make management of traded
coral reef species more effective for the conservation of species, and also for the wellbeing of communities that depend on this trade.


FLAVOBACTERIA-TURF ALGAE SYNERGISM (Abstract ID: 28821 | Poster ID: 138)
Coral reef degradation is often associated with overgrowth of ungrazed fleshy turf
and macroalgae. While some mechanisms of microbially-mediated coral mortality at
macroalgae and turf algae on the enrichment of specific coral pathogens. Recent studies
demonstrate that turf algae foster specific copiotrophic guilds, including Alteromonadales and Flavobacteriales. Some species of Flavobacteria are known pathogens, causing
a variety of well-documented marine fish diseases and are suggested to play a role in
polymicrobial coral diseases such as Black Band, White Band, and White Plague. This
study investigates the role of Flavobacteria in promoting a competitive advantage of turf
over corals. Flavobacteria isolates were cultivated from turf algae enrichment cultures
setup in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii. The genomes of 15 different species of Flavobacteria
were sequenced using the Illumina Miseq sequencing platform. These genomes are
being annotated for the functional capacity to metabolize turf algal derived organic
exudates, as well as genes involved in pathogenicity.


LIMITED MORTALITY IN REEF CORALS OF THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA DURING THE 2015 EL NIÑO: EVIDENCE OF ADAPTATION? (Abstract ID: 30098 |
Poster ID: 361)
A strong El Niño Southern Oscillation event affected the tropical eastern Pacific in
2015, causing sea temperature to rise above the coral bleaching threshold for several
months. The objective of this study was to quantify the effect of the ENSO-induced
warming in the Gulf of California, an area that was severely impacted by the 1987-88

285

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

STICKING AND SINKING: A MECHANISTIC APPROACH TO HOW CORAL
Poster ID: 431)


STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY MEDIATES FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE OF REEF
FISH ASSEMBLAGES AMONG CORAL HABITATS (Abstract ID: 27817)

Sediments can impact the reproduction and developmental stages of coral and therefore
threaten the resilience and recovery of reefs following disturbances. In a series of
controlled experiments, we examined how suspended sediments typical of dredging
operations may affect the ascent of coral egg-sperm bundles and impede fertilisation on
the water’s surface. We reveal that sediment grains can ballast and delay the ascent of
egg-sperm bundles during spawning, and quantitatively model scenarios to predict the
conditions that cause ballasting, and the subsequent reduction in egg-sperm encounter
rates. Next, we reveal that successfully surfaced gametes are also threatened by sediment
exposure due to sperm-limitation. Using multiple lines of evidence, we propose that the
formation of sediment-sperm flocs is the primary mechanism responsible for a decrease
in fertilisation success during sediment exposure, and detail the conditions that trigger
this mechanism. This research forms part of a broader question of how sediments impact the early life history stages of corals and quantification of each of these interactions
are improving our understanding of the risks that sediments from dredging, river plumes
and resuspension pose, allowing for improved management around these events.

Coral community composition is changing on coral reefs worldwide. Direct anthropogenic stressors and climate change have differential effects among coral species, causing
increased dominance of more stress-resistant and/or weedy coral species. The extent
to which altered composition of coral assemblages influences reef fish assemblages remains largely unknown. We investigate how the functional structure of fish assemblages
varies among six distinct coral habitats. An ecological traits-based analysis was used to
compare the functional richness, functional evenness, and functional divergence of fish
assemblages among these coral habitats. Our results reveal differences in the functional
richness and functional divergence, but not functional evenness, of fish assemblages,
with structural complexity of coral habitats being the best predictor of these differences.
Fish assemblages in branching Porites habitat were functionally richer than those inPocillopora and soft coral habitats, largely due to the presence of nocturnally active, schooling
cardinalfishes in the branching Porites habitat. Massive and branching Porites habitats
displayed greater functional divergence in fish assemblages than Pocillopora habitats because of a greater abundance of small, schooling planktivores which were rare or absent
on lower complexity Pocillopora habitats. Our results indicate that coral composition
may act as a habitat filter, affecting the distribution and abundance of associated species
traits, particularly those of small-bodied schooling fishes.



PLASMA MEMBRANE PROTEOMIC RESPONSE OF THERMALLY STRESSED
SYMBIODINIUM: IMPLICATIONS FOR SYMBIOSIS BREAKDOWN DURING
BLEACHING (Abstract ID: 28775)
The endosymbiosis between corals and Symbiodinium range from resilient to fragile, with
fragile partnerships often resulting in coral bleaching. Different factors affecting symbiosis
have been extensively studied (increased temperatures, sedimentation, etc.) but the underlying mechanisms determining resilience deserve further attention. Because symbioses
between the alga and host are initiated by cell-cell contact, extracellular membrane protein
interactions between partners play important roles in recognition and downstream retention
or rejection of the algal symbiont. Our overarching questions involve determining protein
types present, what their possible roles in symbiotic mediation might be, and how these
are affected by different stressors. We approach this by isolating cell surface membrane
proteins using a membrane-impermeable biotin probe on intact cells and purifying the
labeled proteins with avidin. These proteins are then tryptically digested and analyzed using
preliminary results identify proteins containing important extracellular domains such as extracellular chaperones, recognition domains important for plant-Rhizobium symbioses, and
domains known to participate in biogenesis of extracellular structural elements. Quantitative
and qualitative changes in isolated proteins between heat-stressed and control samples will
be presented, highlighting Symbiodinium changes that potentially affect communication
between partners and providing further insight into symbiosis breakdown.

USING MOLECULAR TOOLS TO DIAGNOSE AND TREAT THE CAUSES OF
CORAL REEF DECLINE (Abstract ID: 28226)
Coral reefs throughout the world are exposed to multiple stressors from local and global
sources. Tools for the assessment and monitoring of coral reefs have been good for measuring losses or gains in percent cover and species diversity, with mortality as the key
indicator of stress. In order to effectively address problems prior to outright mortality,
better health indicators are needed that can measure changes at the cellular and organismal levels, rather than at the community or ecosystem levels and with response times
of weeks to months rather than years to decades. Protein expression in corals can detect
stress responses at the sublethal level, when intervention can yield the most promising
results. Coupled with genetic information, effects at the population level can also be
determined and evaluated. Analyses of coral tissue samples collected from three areas
in Hawaii, Honokowai, Wahikuli (west Maui) and Maunalua Bay, Oahu, demonstrate the
value of molecular tools in identifying stress exposure qualitatively and quantitatively
and in providing a framework for assessing the effectiveness of mitigation activities.
The data demonstrate that both adaptation and selection are occurring on these reefs,
and raise the concern that while species of corals may persist, genetic diversity is being
lost, and hence, so is population resilience to changes in stress profiles. Molecular tools
provide data, which can help in the proper allocation of limited human, financial and institutional resources to enhance the ability of corals and coral reefs to persist and thrive.


HIGH CRYPTIC DIVERSITY, TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTY AND THE RISK OF
SILENT EXTINCTIONS IN CORALS (Abstract ID: 29247)


To prevent regional extinctions and potential losses of diversity and evolutionary novelty, accurate inventories of coral diversity assets must be established. For most IndoPacific coral communities taxonomic uncertainty is a recurring challenge that precludes
the documentation of species trend data. Without this information, species are unlikely
to be included on national threatened species lists even when they have been flagged as
vulnerable or endangered at the global level. As a result, the combined absence of robust
species delimitations, lack of demographic data and a shortfall of targeted conservation
action at appropriate scales increases the risk that silent extinctions will occur. If globally
threatened species were endemic to a particular country however, this could provide
the necessary trigger for inclusion in national threatened species management plans,
which would aid their conservation. Nevertheless, to date the overwhelming majority of
Indo-Pacific corals are thought to occupy expansive, demographically linked geographic
ranges and few are recognized as endemic to a single country. Here I will present new
phylogeographic and phylogenomic data to demonstrate that extremely high levels of
genetic divergence, indicative of cryptic speciation, occurs within several well-recognized and widespread ‘species’ of reef building coral. I aim to raise awareness about the
implications of misunderstanding species boundaries and geographic ranges and discuss
the opportunities for more efficacious conservation of coral diversity.

CHANGES IN FISH WARINESS ACROSS A GRADIENT OF INTENSITY IN SCUBA
DIVING ACTIVITY (Abstract ID: 28408)
Human recreational activities like hiking can elicit anti-predator responses in prey species that are similar in nature and magnitude to those elicited by hunting, sometimes triggering dramatic shifts in the surrounding ecosystem via behaviorally mediated cascades.
Studies that test analogous hypotheses about the effects of recreational activities in
marine systems are rare, but provide evidence that SCUBA diving activities elicit antipredator behavior in some marine fish. While exposure to spear fishing activity has been
correlated to increased wariness in coral reef fish even inside areas that are protected
from fishing, the effects of different chronic levels of intensity in SCUBA diving on reef
fish behavior remains virtually untested. We measured the wariness of herbivorous coral
reef fish to recreational diver presence and approaches across a gradient of chronic
intensity in diver activity surrounding Little Cayman Island, where spear fishing is prohibited and SCUBA diving tourism is popular. We compared the flight initiation distances
(FID) and changes in pre-flight behavior of reef fish among sites with different historical
levels of tourist visitation to determine the impact of different levels of intensity in recreational diving on the behavior of reef fish. We discuss the applicability of our results
to the management of recreational activities on coral reefs, which currently assume
negligible impacts from SCUBA diving activities, and potential interactions between fishing and recreational diving effects in coral reef systems worldwide.


286

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


stressors. Colonies still in existence are sparsely distributed only intensifying the issue of
outplant colonies growing in offshore nurseries to designated restoration sites. The
manpower required to restore reefs to their previous state, may become a limiting factor
in the amount of coral that can be outplanted. The integration of spawning processes
may generate more effective coral restoration practices to enhance population sizes
project was commenced by The Florida Aquarium, Coral Restoration Foundation,
and University of Florida. Since its inception, the project has grown to include over 5
additional partners that meet annually for the predicted Caribbean Acropora spawn.
Methods for the tracking of egg development, creation of spawning structures, efficient
settlement materials, and tanks for grow out have all been developed from this project,
building a foundation to expand upon for future applications to restoration programs.
This project is a superlative demonstration of collaboration across organizations for the
advancement of solutions for reef recovery, in excess of what any individual partner
could have achieved working alone.

DISTURBANCE DYNAMICS AND MARGINAL REEF CORAL POPULATIONS
(Abstract ID: 28095)
Marginal coral reefs are controlled by frequent disturbances that lead to a progressive
“weeding out” of otherwise dominant taxa capable of reef-building. Empirical observations and models have shown that the structure of marginal, non-accreting reefs is environmentally-controlled either via repetitive mass mortality or sub-optimal environmental
conditions stunting coral growth. This controls the local species pool and does not allow
competitive networks to reach climax. Using stage-based models it is shown how coral
population dynamics relates to disturbance frequency and how variable disturbance
and connectivity can control persistence or disappearance. At least some marginal reefs
show signs of high local recruitment, which facilitates phase-shifts away from corals
after multiple, severe disturbances that disrupt inflow of larvae. Naturally high and, with
climate change, increasing disturbance-frequencies primarily skew size-distributions
towards the smaller classes, which opens space for potential competitors (corals, algae
or other organisms) and reduces fecundity exponentially. Shift in size classes, community
composition and competition can rapidly lead to changes in stability patterns with the
emergence of alternate states by acting alone or in concert. Steepness of thresholds and
mechanisms determines whether alternate states are reached via bifurcations and are
relatively stable, or gradually and are reversible. Examples of marginal or pauci-specific
coral systems from all oceans are examined.


PROCESSES DRIVING CORAL RESILIENCE TO BLEACHING (Abstract ID: 29511)


Coral bleaching is increasing in frequency and extent on reefs around the world.
Although these events are predicted to become more frequent with climate change,
our understanding of the factors that drive resistance to and recovery from bleaching is
incomplete. The last documented coral bleaching in Hawai’i was 1996, but in the summers of both 2014 and 2015 corals throughout Hawai’i experienced extensive bleaching.
On Oahu, field surveys in both year showed that reefs in Kaneohe Bay experienced
40-80% bleaching. Species diversity surveys showed that Pocillopora spp. were the most
susceptible and Leptastraea purpurea was extremely resistant in both years of bleaching.
In October 2014, 150 coral colonies were tagged and monitored monthly to assess
recovery from bleaching. Porites compressaand Pocillopora damicornis appeared fully
recovered three months after the peak summer temperatures, but Montipora capitata
had significantly slower recovery. Only three colonies of Montipora capitata and three
colonies ofPocillopora damicornis died from bleaching during the two years of monitoring. Some corals remained unbleached through both events, suggesting adaptation or
acclimatization to thermal stress. There is a pressing need to understand coral genetic
and physiological mechanisms of thermal tolerance in these corals to better manage for
reef resilience in the face of climate change.

SKELETAL GROWTH TRENDS OF TWO MASSIVE REEF-BUILDING CORALS ON
THE FLORIDA REEF TRACT: ARE INSHORE CORALS BETTER OFF IN A WARMING OCEAN? (Abstract ID: 28785)


Through the slow, continuous growth of their calcium carbonate skeletons, corals
record invaluable information about past environmental conditions and how they may
affect colony fitness. As the warming global climate continues to threaten coral reefs
throughout the tropics, these living archives can be used to help identify reefs that
are particularly susceptible or resilient to environmental change. Mounting evidence
suggests that nearshore corals may be better suited than their forereef counterparts to
cope with warming ocean temperatures due to their acclimatization to highly variable
thermal environments. To test this hypothesis, we compared skeletal growth records of
inshore and offshore reef corals across ~200 km of the Florida Reef Tract using cores
extracted from two widespread massive reef-building coral species, Siderastrea siderea
and Pseudodiploria strigosa. In 2015-2016, ten cores of each species were extracted from
four sets of paired inshore-offshore reef sites spanning the entire reef tract, and growth
parameters were assessed using 3-D computerized tomography. Skeletal extension rates
were estimated from the thickness of high- and low-density annual growth couplets and
were combined with density measurements to yield calcification rate. This century-scale
investigation of inshore-offshore differences in coral growth will provide critical insights
into our understanding of how corals on the Florida Reef Tract are likely to respond to
future climate change scenarios.

LA PLATA ISLAND ECUADOR: REFUGE OF CORAL RESELIENCE (Abstract ID:
30121 | Poster ID: 55)
La Plata Island located in the Machalilla National Park, Ecuador, is perhaps one of
the southernmost refuge of corals in the eastern Pacific. Its rich marine diversity
represents a source of income for the local fisheries and tourism. This study presents an
overview of the distribution, species richness and percent coral cover at La Plata Island.
Macroinvertebrates and reef fishes are also reported as fauna associated to the coral
formations. Twenty species of corals, one hundred and fifty-one species of fishes and
thirty three species of macro invertebrates are registered. The massive Pavona clavus
is the dominant species in La Plata, with coral formations of 6 m high. The two genus
Pavona and Psammocora have the broadest depth range distribution from 1.5m to 15
lines tangled in coral colonies, plastic trash, tourists articles and discarded fishing gear.
Nevertheless, coral colonies maintain good health. The results of this study suggests that
the island of La Plata has resilient coral formations, capable to resist the two strong El
Niño events 1982/83 and 1997/98.



MOLECULAR PHYLOGENY OF THE CARIBBEAN SCLERACTINIAN CORALS:
SOLVING THE PUZZLE (Abstract ID: 29836 | Poster ID: 33)

ACROPORA CERVICORNIS SPAWNING PROJECT: A PARTNERSHIP ACROSS
ORGANIZATIONS PROVIDING ADDITIONAL SOLUTIONS TO REEF RECOVERY
(Abstract ID: 30015 | Poster ID: 681)

Scleractinian corals are the main reef-building organisms in both tropical and cold-water
coral reefs. Paradoxically, complete phylogenetic analyses are lacking for all coral species
in provinces as small as the Caribbean. These analyses constitute a powerful tool for
defining systematics, taxonomy and relationships among different species, but when it
comes to scleractinian corals, clear relationships have not been clearly established. The

Once abundant throughout the Florida Keys and Caribbean, Acropora cervicornis
populations have drastically declined due to a variety of natural and anthropogenic

287

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

paucity of studies for phylogenetic analysis in this group can be explained by the lack
of DNA sequences with enough phylogenetic signal for most scleractinian genera. This
study aimed to establish the most complete molecular phylogeny for Caribbean scleractinian corals using ITS2 sequences for 41 coral species, which have been corrected
using their predicted RNA secondary structure. Secondary structures allow generating
enhanced tree topologies. On the other hand, we assessed the divergence times on the
ITS2-based phylogeny, in order to determine the approximate age of the taxa studied.
Results show that, as it has been suggested before, the Scleractinia class divides into two
major clades (robust and complex), but it also showed some differences. One of the
most important results is the sister relationship between Leptoseris cucullata and Agaricia grahamae, which has not been reported before for Caribbean scleractinian corals, as
well as likely new species in this clade. The clustering in the Agariciidae family helps to
understand how this group can be potentially indivisible, suggesting a recent adaptive
radiation in the Caribbean.


EXPERIENTIAL COURSES FOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS AT THE HAWAII
INSTITUTE OF MARINE BIOLOGY (Abstract ID: 29958 | Poster ID: 718)
Sustainable interactions between coastal communities and the marine environment begin with public education and the sharing of knowledge in marine science. At the Hawai’i
Institute of Marine Biology (HIMB), inquiry-based summer courses are offered to high
school youth with the objective of creating educational pathways for future scientists,
managers, and stewards by increasing science and environmental literacy skills. Each
summer, HIMB enrolls Hawai’i high school students in the Research Experiences in
Marine Science (REMS) Program, as well as hosts students from around the world in the
Science in Action (SiA) Program, both held at Moku o Lo’e in Kāne’ohe Bay. Post-baccalaureate interns, graduate students, high school science teachers, and UH faculty and
staff develop and prepare lessons that include field and laboratory exercises in diverse
disciplines such as coral reef monitoring, computer data processing, squid neuroethology, sea urchin spawning and fertilization, marine bioacoustics, fish larval development,
and ocean acidification. For REMS, the course also includes an extended unit dedicated
towards the development, execution, and presentation of original group research
projects. Students work in small teams to plan an experimental design, complete field
data collection, analyze data with statistical tests, and offer a formal presentation of
their projects through a scientific paper and symposium talk. Student assessments and
program evaluations show improvements in science literacy skills, including in the use of
the scientific method and investigation.



FEAST AND FAMINE: A STRATEGY FOR SURVIVING OCEAN WARMING (Abstract ID: 29820)
Enhanced warming of the central tropical Pacific is projected over the next decades,
and efforts are underway to identify reefs that might survive this change. Stress bands,
anomalously high density bands seen in skeletal cores of massive reef-building corals
can provide insights into the persistence and variability of bleaching events across space
and time. We tested the connection between stress band formation in Porites corals, the
intensity of thermal stress and the scale of bleaching using both laboratory manipulation
experiments and in situ field observations. Results provided a framework to interpret
stress bands in corals from the remote island of Jarvis, central equatorial Pacific, in the
absence of direct historical observations of bleaching. At Jarvis, stress bands appear
consistently during strong El Nino events back to the early 1900’s, indicating that Jarvis
may have bleached regularly over the last century, yet maintains exceptionally high
biomass and percent live coral cover. We visited Jarvis in November 2015 and observed
bleaching across multiple taxa including Porites. Still, the majority of colonies were
between non-El Nino and El Nino years suggests that bleached corals may be living off
substantial energetic reserves accumulated during periods when ocean productivity is
high. Whether this “feast and famine” strategy for surviving El Nino-induced thermal
stress can carry corals through the unprecedented 2015 warming will be revealed in a
return expedition in May 2016.

DEMOGRAPHIC DYNAMICS OF THE COMMON DEMOSPONGE IRCINIA FELIX
(Abstract ID: 30092)
Sponges are one of the principal benthic components of Caribbean coral reefs. Despite
the fact that they have multiple functional roles, little is known about their demography
and ecology. Here, we present a demographic study of the common demosponge Ircinia
felix performed at Tamarindo Bay, Culebra, Puerto Rico. Preliminary studies comparing
size structure of two populations within Tamarindo Bay, Tamarindo North (TN) and
Tamarindo South (TS), indicate that sponges at TN are significantly larger than sponges
aim to determine whether such spatial differences in population size structure can be
explained by differences in rates of survival, growth, and/or recruitment. Significant
differences where only observed when comparing growth rates. The fact that rates of
survival and recruitment where similar between localities may be the causal factor for
the lack of significant difference in population growth rates (l) which varied TN and
TS (0.79 and 0.74, respectively). Interestingly, elasticity analyses suggest that the major
contributor to l at TN was survival of large sponges whereas at TS survival of small
environmental conditions by means of life history traits plasticity. We are currently
conducting a study to determine if the noticeably high presence of gorgonians in TN in
comparison to TS may be responsible for site-specific growth rates.



MANAGING AND PROTECTING CORAL REEFS THROUGH
PAPAHĀNAUMOKUĀKEA MARINE NATIONAL MONUMENT’S PERMIT PROGRAM (Abstract ID: 27901 | Poster ID: 680)
Access and activities within marine protected areas (MPAs) typically are regulated by
a permit system to manage and mitigate human impacts to resources. While some
MPAs are managed by a single agency responsible for reviewing and issuing permits,
Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument (“PMNM” or “Monument”) has a
multi-agency co-management structure. PMNM’s joint permit program serves as the
primary regulatory tool for how co-managing partners effectively manage and protect
coral reef resources. Through PMNM’s permit system managers have worked together
to authorize essential studies for understanding coral reef ecosystems as well as activities aimed to protect corals. Additionally, through the Monument’s permit program,
co-managing partners have collaboratively developed various protocols to protect coral
reefs as both natural and cultural resources. These include vessel hull inspections for
alien invasive species and best management practices. From a native Hawaiian perspective, corals (and all natural resources) are considered cultural resources. All permitted
individuals are required to attend a cultural briefing to learn about the significance of
these resources to native Hawaiians and are encouraged to approach research activities
with this perspective. This case-study explores the origins and evolution of PMNM’s
permit program, and how it has and continues to contribute to coral reef management
and protection.

CORAL BLEACHING IN TELA, HONDURAS AND THE MESOAMERICAN REEF
REGION (Abstract ID: 29058)
The third global coral bleaching episode began affecting reefs worldwide in summer
2015. This study presents the first recorded bleaching event in a high coral cover reef
system (≤69%) in Tela Bay, Honduras observed in September-November, 2015. This
area is also exposed to high sedimentation, turbidity and nutrient inputs from ten bodies of water. To estimate bleaching, corals were originally surveyed using the AGRRA
protocol and further evaluated with the bar drop method, which assesses a minimum of
150 colonies per site in shallow (5-7m) and deep sites (9-14m). Sea temperature (T°C)
was obtained in situ using loggers from mid July to December and compared to satellite
data (1km). A bleaching severity scale (normal, pale, partially bleached, bleached-over
80%) and percent mortality (new, transitory and old) was assessed in 6 sites. Preliminary
results show that the most abundant and affected corals are Undaria tenuifolia, Porites astreoidesand Siderastrea siderea, with primarily paling, partial bleaching and low mortality.
The overall conditions of surveyed colonies were pale (43%), partially bleached (35%),
normal (18%), and fully bleached (5%). The average T showed sept-nov as the hottest
months (30.8°C) with a drop of 1.39°C in December. This study is included in a regional
evaluation of 65 sites throughout the Mesoamerican Reef, as part of the Coral Bleaching
288

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Emergency Response monitoring plan led by the Healthy Reefs Initiative and 19 partner
organizations. Overall, bleaching status in the MAR region will also be presented.



CORAL MUCUS FUELS THE SPONGE LOOP IN WARM- AND COLD-WATER
CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 28777)
Scleractinian corals engineer the framework of shallow warm-water (WW) and deep-sea
cold-water (CW) coral reefs and control biogeochemical cycles by releasing coral mucus
in the form of particulate and dissolved organic matter (DOM). Caribbean reef sponges
transform DOM into particulate detritus, thereby controlling the transfer of energy and
nutrients in DOM up the reef food web via the recently discovered sponge loop. Thus,
the dissolved fraction of released coral mucus may represent an important DOM source
fuelling the sponge loop. We investigated the transfer of coral mucus into tissue components of the WW sponges Mycale fistulifera andNegombata magnifica, and the CW sponge
Hymedesmia coriacea using lab-based stable isotope tracer experiments. Results revealed
a direct trophic link between scleractinian corals and reef sponges, and showed that
21–40% of assimilated coral mucus C and 32–39% of N was transformed and released
as particulate detritus. Follow-up experiments demonstrated the consumption of WW
sponge detritus by sponge-associated detritivores, the ophiuroids Ophiothrix savignyi and
Ophiocoma scolopendrina, and the polychaete Polydorella smurovi, thereby showing the
transfer of sponge detritus to higher trophic levels. These findings of a coral mucusfuelled sponge loop in ecosystems as different as WW and CW reefs provide evidence
for its ubiquitous functional role in contributing to the efficient biogeochemical cycling of
limiting nutrients and energy in these highly productive marine environments.

ANTIOXIDANT DEFENSE AND ACID-BASE REGULATION: PHYSIOLOGICAL
TOLERANCE AND ACCLIMATIZATION TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION AND
WARMING IN POCILLOPORA DAMICORNIS (Abstract ID: 29667)
Given the rapid pace of global ocean acidification and warming, methods by which
corals can use their existing physiological repertoire to tolerate changing environmental
conditions may provide insight into their potential for acclimatization and longerterm persistence. Ocean acidification and warming may interact to challenge larval
physiology through increased production of reactive oxygen species and modification
and pCO2 after which antioxidant defense and acid-base maintenance were assessed.
Planulae had higher total antioxidant potential at High-pCO2 than under ambient conditions, and planulae released at the peak of spawning had a greater response than those
released two days later. Activity of catalase, an antioxidant enzyme was also measured.
Partial activity of Na+/K+-ATPase did not differ significantly between treatments. One of
the first examples of oxidative stress response and acid-base regulation in coral larvae,
short-term plasticity of antioxidant defense in coral larvae may be an important mechanism underlying acclimatization to ocean acidification and warming.



EFFECTS OF SEDIMENTATION ON SCLERACTINIAN CORAL SPECIES COMPOSITION ALONG A RIVER GRADIENT IN MACAJALAR BAY, NORTHERN
MINDANAO, PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29336 | Poster ID: 224)
Coral survival is dependent on several factors and sedimentation is one factor that can
affect all others. Macajalar Bay in Misamis Oriental is a major fishing ground for 14
municipalities and 2 cities. There are three major rivers that empty into the bay bringing
different kinds of river run-off that can affect biological, geological, physical and chemical processes. Eight sites were chosen (2 controls and 6 impacted) where the sediment
accumulation rate varied for each site throughout the year (this included wet and dry
seasons). Also notable was the difference in sediment characteristics, where control sites
had mostly sand but the sites nearest to the river mouth were mostly silt. However some
sites displayed a trend in different sediment accumulations through the wet and dry
seasons. Coral assemblages also varied in colony sizes, life-forms, but most species were
found in all sites.

DIFFERENTIAL RECYCLING OF CORAL- AND ALGAL-DERIVED DISSOLVED
ORGANIC MATTER BY CORAL REEF SPONGES (Abstract ID: 28784)
Sponges are proposed to play a key role in the recycling of energy and nutrients on
coral reefs by rapidly taking up dissolved organic matter (DOM) and transferring it as
particulate detritus to higher trophic levels via the recently discovered sponge loop pathway. Corals and macroalgae release large quantities of DOM that, due to differences in
quality and composition, exert differing effects on reef ecosystem functioning. However,
the influence of various reef DOM sources on recycling via the sponge loop has not
been investigated. Here we used stable isotope pulse-chase experiments to compare the
processing of coral- and algal-derived DOM by three Red Sea reef sponges: Chondrilla
sacciformis, Hemimycale arabica, and Mycale fistulifera. All three species assimilated
host + associated microbes). While algal-derived DOM was incorporated more into
bacteria-specific phospholipid fatty acids (PLFAs), coral-derived DOM was preferentially
incorporated into PLFAs specific to the sponge host. A substantial fraction of the DOM
assimilated by the sponges was subsequently released as detritus, but again, algal-derived
DOM was released at a higher rate. The more rapid uptake and transformation rates of
algal- compared with coral-derived DOM suggests that reef community phase-shifts
from coral to algal dominance may stimulate DOM cycling through the sponge loop with
potential consequences for reef biogeochemical cycles.

Janeiro, Brazil, Brazil

THE POWER OF MICROBES: MICROBIAL BIOENERGETICS OF CORAL-ALGAL
INTERACTIONS (Abstract ID: 28922 | Poster ID: 104)
The once steady-states of coral reef ecosystems are transitioning to algal-dominated
states on a global scale. Thermodynamic theory predicts that as these systems undergo
transition they will optimize their components to maximize power output. Thus, we
hypothesize that perturbed areas far from steady-state such as the coral-algal interface
will harbor microbial communities optimized to maximize their thermodynamic power
output. To test this hypothesis, we used a novel combination of methods to provide a
bioenergetic analysis of interaction zones. This study reveals that the energetic demands
of microbial communities at the coral-algal interaction interface are higher than in the
communities associated with either of the single organisms. This is evident through a)
higher microbial power output, and b) lower oxygen concentration at interaction zones
compared to areas distal from the interface. Increase in microbial power output is
significantly correlated with the ratio of heterotrophic to autotrophic microbes but not
microbial cell abundance. Finally, microbial metagenomes generated from coral-algal
interactions suggest that a shift from efficient glycolytic pathways towards faster, less
efficient alternative catabolic pathways is responsible for the change in power output.


289

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

transcriptomes and used to identify loci under selection. Polymorphism and heterozygozity for immune system components at the island and patch level are examined to test for
heterozygote advantage and disruptive or balancing selection. Metagenomes are used to
survey virulence factors or immunity-related genes within holobiont microbial communities. Target loci include putative epithelial attached mucin-like glycoproteins important
in a range of host-symbiont specific interactions. Correlations between symbiont genes
and host immune system gene expression at the intracolony to intercolony levels reveal
potential host-symbiont gene by gene interaction and suggests mechanisms for hostbacteria interactions that drive holobiont composition.

Together these data suggest that coral-algal interfaces harbor higher proportions of
heterotrophic microbes that are optimized to maximize the power output, as opposed
to yield. This yield to power shift provides a thermodynamic mechanism underlying the
global microbialization of coral reefs.


SIZE-SELECTIVE FISHING OF CORAL REEF FISH COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID:
29604)

REVISITING DEPTH-DIVERSITY GRADIENTS IN REEF-BUILDING CORALS
(Abstract ID: 28264)

Coral reef ecosystems are a vital food resource for millions of people. Although the
negative effect of fishing on total fish biomass is well documented, our understanding of
the impacts of human disturbance on fish community structure is limited to studies at local scales. We analysed an extensive dataset of reef fish community body sizes collected
at 38 Pacific islands and atolls to examine how reef fish community size structure and
total community biomass varied across two metrics of anthropogenic disturbance and
eight environmental covariates. Our results revealed that the slopes of fish community
size spectra steepened with increasing human population density and proximity to provincial capital, consistent with a reduction in the biomass of large-bodied fish. Total reef
fish biomass was substantially depleted even at low levels of human presence, though
oceanic productivity and sea surface temperature were also important drivers. Our
results indicate that across multi-gear, multi-species fisheries, exploitation of reef fish
communities is size-selective. Furthermore, we observed substantial natural variation in
reef fish biomass that suggests biomass-based management strategies may be difficult to
implement across large spatial scales. In contrast, impacts on community size structure
were consistent across diverse reef communities. Traditional fisheries concepts such as
size spectrum indicators may help to develop successful approaches to the sustainable
management of coral reef systems.

Species are not distributed evenly across geographical space, and understanding the
mechanisms generating species’ distributions is a fundamental goal of ecology. Among
the most prominent of these patterns are changes in species richness over gradients
reefs, with depth zonation recognized as a ubiquitous feature of coral ecosystems.
However, depth ranges of reef-building corals at any particular site are influenced by a
decline with depth, or peak at intermediate depths (15-35 m), mirroring altitudinal
richness gradients in terrestrial ecosystems. Understanding depth-diversity patterns is a
crucial component of revealing how species occupy ecological and geographical space.
However, robust analyses of depth-diversity relationships have been compromised by a
chronic under-sampling of deeper habitats (> 20 m), and considerable changes in coral
nomenclature in recent decades. As such, the generality of this pattern is questionable.
Here, we use modern statistical techniques and a novel comprehensive, species-level
data set conducted over a large depth gradient (0-45 m) to revisit fundamental questions
about depth-diversity relationships in reef-building corals. We show how species richness
changes over depth, and identify ecological traits associated with coral depth ranges. Our
results provide new insights into ecological factors influencing depth ranges and depthdiversity relationships in corals.



THE ANTIOXIDANT RESPONSES DIFFER BETWEEN SYMBIODINIUMSTRAINS
FROM DIFFERENT GEOGRAPHIC ORIGINS (Abstract ID: 28310)

RECRUITMENT PATTERNS OF CORAL REEF FISHES IN THE CENTRAL RED SEA:
DIFFERENCES ACCORDING TO SEASON AND REEF TYPE (Abstract ID: 28664)

Studies conducted these last two decades have revealed that high sea surface temperatures accompanied by high levels of solar irradiance are responsible for an over
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading to the disruption of the symbiosis
between cnidarians and their symbioticSymbiodinium. But, all coral species do not show
the same sensitivity to stress. In this context we examined how the antioxidant network
of different Symbiodinium species responds to oxidative stress. We bypassed the various
thermal and light tolerances existing among the genusSymbiodinium by using a chemical
approach (menadione). ROS produced during this oxidative burst reduced photosynthesis by 30 to 50% and significantly decreased the activity of superoxide dismutase. In
addition, the low level of lipid peroxidation concomitantly with the decrease in the concentration of diatoxanthin and other carotenoids during the stress confirms their function
of antioxidants and their role in the stabilization of membrane lipids. The analysis of the
cellular damages also indicates that proteins were damaged and most likely eliminated
by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Finally, caspase-like activity decreased suggesting
that cell death mechanisms are not initiated at the early stage of the stress. Although, the
mechanisms at play seem to be the same, we found that the temperate Symbiodinium
strain (A1) was less impacted by the treatment with menadione than the tropical strain
(F1) suggesting that the variations observed are related to their geographic origin.

The Red Sea is the world’s northernmost tropical sea. The latitudinal extent of its deep,
narrow basin and its limited connection to the world’s oceanic system make for a unique
environment with extreme temperature and salinity regimes. Yet the Red Sea harbors
one of the largest and most biodiverse coral reef systems in our planet. In order to better
understand the impact of these unique environmental conditions on the biology of coral
reef fishes, a year-long light trap study was conducted on three reefs in the central Red
Sea—one inshore, one midshore and one offshore—in order to quantify seasonal timing,
biomass and biodiversity of incoming reef fish recruits. Collection took place during every new moon for five consecutive nights to capture seasonal variation in recruitment at
different reef types and habitats. The mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I (COI) region
was used to identify the trapped recruits. To date, very little is known about annual reproductive peaks in this region. This dataset will provide a useful guide for identification of
recruits of coral reef fishes, and will increase the number of genetic barcodes available
for coral reef fishes.
Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia


HOST IMMUNE SYSTEM POLYMORPHISM AND GENE EXPRESSION IN HOSTSYMBIONT RELATIONSHIPS (Abstract ID: 28816 | Poster ID: 140)
Across domains of life, immune system components display the highest rates of adaptive
evolution and maintained polymorphisms. Within holobionts, population, local or individual-level host polymorphism and expression of immune system components allow
flexible interactions and adaptive immune response to symbionts while potentially driving holobiont microbiota. To investigate immune system variation and immunity related
gene-expression and to assess the role that these components might play in holobiont
composition, metatranscriptomes and metagenomes were constructed from Porites spp
holobionts from sites across the Southern Line Islands in the Central Pacific. Replicate
samples were collected within individual coral colonies across multiple colonies at site
and island scales. Individual coral genotypes across multiple loci were derived from

PRODUCTIVITY AND SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE CORRELATE WITH
PELAGIC LARVAL DURATIONS OF DAMSELFISHES IN THE RED SEA (Abstract
ID: 28911)
To date, nearly 60% of all marine studies in the Red Sea have taken place in the
northernmost region, the Gulf of Aqaba. However, temperature, salinity, and nutrients
gradually change from north to south, locally shaping coral reef fish communities and

290

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Recent biogeochemical studies have shown that the health of nearshore coral reefs can
be directly impacted by land use practices in the adjacent terrestrial environment. Rivers
often facilitate the transportation of excess nutrients, sediments, and other pollutants,
resulting in both acute and chronic impacts to corals. Although the conduits of delivery
are understood, establishing riverine pollutant thresholds that directly impact coral
reef health, has remained elusive. This is largely due to the lack of real-time sampling
connecting both environments and archival sampling that links historical land use with
original stress to reefs. Here we present a progress report of our multi-tiered approach
towards developing a toolkit consisting of step-wise decision tree models and a management guide. To date, we have begun to (1) quantify watershed pollutant concentrations
to discern the threshold for acute stress on coral health; (2) identify point source impacts
and mitigation success of existing riparian buffers; (3) link historical land use practices
with marine samples; (4) develop a bibliographic library/ historical archive for Guánica
related to watershed and oceanographic studies; and (5) train the next generation of
resource scientists and managers.

populations of the Red Sea. We examined the influence of this environmental gradient
in the Red Sea on the pelagic larval durations (PLDs) of three damselfishes, Dascyllus
latitude, sea surface temperature (SST), and primary production (CHLA; chlorophyll
aconcentrations). Among all three species, we find a consistent decrease in PLDs with
increasing SST and primary production (CHLA) towards the southern Red Sea. This
trend is likely related to higher food availability and increased metabolic rates in that
region. We suggest that food availability is a potentially stronger driver of variation in
PLD than temperature, especially in highly oligotrophic regions. Additionally, variations
response to local environmental differences for endemic species. We also report the first
average PLD for this species over a broad geographic range (19.82 ± 2.92 days).


TRADE-OFFS AND VARIATION IN INSHORE CORAL HEALTH AND BIOCHEMICAL CONDITION ALONG WATER QUALITY GRADIENTS ON THE GREAT BARRIER REEF, AUSTRALIA (Abstract ID: 29353)
Biochemical attributes of corals can be used as indicators to monitor spatio-temporal
changes in their health and condition. This study explores how a coral species (Acropora
tenuis) can respond to differing water quality conditions on inshore reefs of the central
Great Barrier Reef. Coral health was monitored along a strong and a weak water quality gradient, each with three reefs at increasing distances from a major river mouth.
Significant differences in coral health traits were detected along the strong water quality
gradient: corals grew fastest, had the least dense skeletons, highest symbiont densities,
and highest tissue energetic content closest to the river mouth. Changes in coral health
traits were far weaker along the second, much weaker, water quality gradient. This
variation in health traits along water quality gradients illustrates that corals acclimatize
and/or adapt to their surrounding environments. Our data indicate that high nutrient and
particulate loads are not detrimental for the survival of this robust coral species, but the
observed biochemical changes are not without potential consequence, including higher
susceptibility to photo-stressors and physical damage. Our study provides insights into
spatio-temporal changes of coral health indicators, the influence of water quality driving
coral condition, and adds valuable data for integrated monitoring of coral reefs.

ENHANCING THE ACQUISITION OF DATA FOR REEF SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT: CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE XL CATLIN SEAVIEW SURVEY (Abstract ID:
30013)


Restraining the global decline of coral reefs requires effective actions from managers,
policy-makers and society as a whole. Reef scientists are challenged with the complex
task of promptly providing relevant inputs for science-based decision-making. The XL
Catlin Seaview Survey (CSS) is applying pioneering technologies for producing broadscale baseline data of coral reefs worldwide. The CSS framework involves three key
components: photographic surveys, image analysis and provision of information. So far,
the CSS has surveyed ~650 shallow transects (10-12 m), each 1-2 km in length, using
customized underwater vehicles for collecting high-definition images. Over 1000 km of
reef habitats have been recorded and more than 650,000 geo-referenced images are
being automatically annotated to optimise data acquisition. Validation of this approach
indicates most benthic categories can be estimated with errors below 4 %. Images are
