to further study their role in invasion success.

WHY DOES THE RED SEA REGION HAVE SO MANY ENDEMIC SPECIES? AN
EVOLUTIONARY AND ECOLOGICAL CONNECTIVITY PERSPECTIVE (Abstract
ID: 29725)
The Red Sea and seas of the Arabian region represent a unique environment with
strong latitudinal gradients in water temperature, salinity, and nutrient load that may act
as ecological barriers to larval dispersal and the eventual settlement of marine fauna.
We conducted broad-scale surveys of reef organisms employing modern taxonomic
at multiple sites throughout the region. This presentation will explore which groups of
reef-associated animals have high levels of endemism in the region. Establishing patterns
of biodiversity and biogeography in the Arabian region is one of the first steps towards
understanding the underlying drivers of adaptation to the unique Arabian environments.
For some taxonomic groups, we have also explored genetic and genomic patterns to
help understand how the distributions of these organisms originated, how the distributions are maintained, and the capacity that various population have for adaptation to
continued global change. The findings also shed light on ecological and evolutionary
connectivity patterns. Future work will integrate local larval dispersal observations,
species distributions, genetic data, and large-scale oceanographic models to further
understand the role of the Red Sea in the general context of Indo-Pacific biogeography.


MORPHOMETRIC AND GENETIC DIFFERENTIATION OF ACANTHOCHROMIS
POLYACANTHUS IN THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29240 | Poster ID: 187)
Acanthochromis polyacanthus (spiny damselfish) is a model organism in dispersal for its
lack of pelagic larval stage. Performance differences have been attributed to divergence
in morphological traits among population. Genetic analyses have also documented
the differentiation in Acanthochromis polyacanthus across color morphs and within
color morphs from different populations in Australia. In this study, we explored the
morphometric and genetic differentiation of spiny damselfish in the Philippines. Principal
component and multivariate analysis of variance at 20 landmark points were evaluated
for 160 individuals from Davao del Norte, Davao Oriental, Sarangani, and Batangas.
Geometric morphometrics by generalized procrustes analysis revealed morphological
disparities among populations. Genetic analysis of the COI gene from a subset of 73
individuals also reveals variation across the 4 populations. Our results suggest that Acanthochromis polyacanthus in the Philippines can be differentiated per population. The
absence of pelagic larval stage may have attributed to the significant morphological and
genetic differences among populations. However, since there is no obvious mechanism
for dispersal for this species, whether this divergence is a result of a plastic response
to environment or genetic adaptation remains a mystery. Keywords: Acanthochromis
polyacanthus, morphometrics, COI gene


LETHAL AND SUB-LETHAL IMPACTS OF DREDGE RELATED STRESSORS ON
CORALS (Abstract ID: 28529)
The impacts of sediments on coral reefs are under intense scrutiny, with increased
coastal development globally. Numerous dredging operations have facilitated this development and can generate large quantities of suspended sediments that can affect nearby
coral populations. Sediments released into the water column result in three proximal
stressors to corals; firstly the suspended sediment can clog filter feeding apparatus,
secondly it attenuates light, reducing levels available for photosynthesis, and lastly it
may fall out of suspension and smother corals. In order to appropriately manage the
impacts of dredging-related stressors on corals, cause-effect pathways followed by doseresponse relationships need to be determined. A series of experiments were conducted
to partition the impacts of suspended sediment and light attenuation on coral, and then
determine low light thresholds for corals. These experiments have provided insight
into the impacts on a suite of health indicators including mortality, colour, chlorophyll
fluorescence, respiration rates, along with chlorophyll and lipid concentrations, providing
information on both lethal and sub-lethal impacts. These experiments have determined
that light is the major stressor on coral health rather than suspended solids, and that
extended periods of reduced light are detrimental to coral health for both adults and
juveniles. These results demonstrate that, excluding sediment deposition, measuring light
levels is an effective way to monitor the stress on reef corals during dredging projects.


EFFECTS OF UNBURNT COAL DUST ON A CORAL, REEF FISH, AND SEAGRASS
SPECIES (Abstract ID: 29570 | Poster ID: 466)
Thousands of coal loaded vessels, carrying up to 150,000 t of coal regularly transit
through coral reef ecosystems in Australasia, the Indo-Pacific and Caribbean regions
each year. Coal particles and dust are physically abrasive, block light penetration into the
water column and contain potentially toxic hydrocarbons and trace metals. Consequently, reef organisms such as corals, can be at risk from suspended and deposited coal
particles that might result from ship loading or spill events. Despite this risk, the effects
of suspended and deposited coal on tropical marine organisms of high conservation
value remains largely unknown. This study conducted a series of controlled experiments exposing three taxa abundant in tropical marine ecosystems (the coral Acropora
tenuis, the reef fish Acanthochromis polyacanthus, and the seagrass Halodule uninervis) to a
range of suspended coal dust (< 63 µm) concentrations (0-275 mg/L) over 28 d. Results
demonstrate that chronic coal exposure can cause considerable lethal effects on corals,
and reductions in seagrass and fish growth rates. Coral survivorship and seagrass growth
rates were inversely related to increasing coal concentrations (≥ 38 mg/L) and effects
increased between 14 and 28 d, whereas fish growth rates were similarly depressed at
all coal concentrations tested. This investigation provides novel insights into direct coal
impacts on key tropical taxa for application in the assessment of risks posed by increasing coal shipments in globally threatened marine ecosystems.


HORMONAL TRIGGERING OF CORAL REEF FISH METAMORPHOSIS (Abstract
ID: 29992)
In coral reef fish, the larva to juvenile transition occurring while recruits colonize the reefs
has been acknowledged as a metamorphosis for more than 70 years. Indeed, this shift
from pelagic to benthic life is accompanied by major changes suited to the new reef environment. However, physiological and hormonal processes that could occur and trigger
this transition remain unknown in coral reef fish. Here, we hypothesized that thyroid hormones (TH) are triggering coral reef fish metamorphosis, as evidenced in temperate and
commercial fish species like flatfishes and sea breams. By capturing larvae at their arrival
into the reefs of Moorea, French Polynesia, we observed a TH peak at metamorphosis
in a surgeonfish, Acanthurus triostegus, and a batfish, Platax orbicularis. We also showed
a TH decrease in 3 other species from different families, suggesting that their TH peak
development and early gut lengthening, while interrupting this pathway leads to delays in
these changes. Overall, these results suggest that coral reef fish metamorphosis seems to
be a classical TH-triggered metamorphosis. Knowing the ability of pollutions like pesticides to disrupt such endocrinal processes, it is of great interest to better characterize this
metamorphosis facing global change and its importance in larval recruitment.


29

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


environmental damage, as well as economic costs and loss of human life. We still do
not fully appreciate the long-term impacts of catastrophes such as the grounding of the
Exxon Valdez in Alaska, and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. One
risk control employed by the shipping industry is marine pilotage – the utilization of an
experienced mariner familiar with a local area to direct itinerant foreign or unfamiliar
vessel’s crew through the hazardous and dynamic environments of ports, coastlines, and
reefs. The organization and engagement of marine pilots varies at national and international levels, influenced by many factors including regulatory frameworks and legislation.
Here we present the usage of coastal pilots in the Great Barrier Reef for the central benefit of shipping safety and environmental protection. With projected growth in shipping
traffic, we discuss strengths and limitations of the current system. Catastrophic accidents
in sensitive marine areas can have severe and lasting impacts, thus a zero-accident goal
requires a different approach to more conventional risk or exposure management.

COLLATERAL DAMAGES OF THE CORALLIVOROUS GASTROPOD DRUPELLA
CORNUS ON CORAL MICROBIAL ASSOCIATES (Abstract ID: 28573 | Poster ID: 147)

com

The grazing activity by specific marine organisms represents a growing threat to the
survival of many scleractinian species. For example, the recent proliferation of the
corallivorous gastropod Drupella cornus now constitutes a critical case in all South East
Asian waters. If the damaging effects caused by this marine snail on coral polyps are
relatively well known, the incidence of grazing on coral microbial associates might also
potentially impair the defense mechanisms and nutritive properties of their bacterial
and viral epibionts. In this study, we tentatively compared the main ecological traits of
coral-associated bacterial and viral communities living in the mucus layer of Acropora
formosa and Acropora palmata, between healthy and predated individuals (ie colonized
under analysis, preliminary results seem to show a substantial impact of the presence
of the gastropod on a variety of ecological markers (abundance, diversity, respiration,
metabolic capacity, life strategy, etc.) for both viral and bacterial communities, whatever
the species considered. Finally, our results suggest that predation, beyond its direct
deleterious mechanical effects to corals, might be also able to cause significant alterations in their symbiotic microbiota, which may subsequently promote the emergence of
opportunistic pathogenic infections.

WHICH FACTORS DRIVE CORAL REEF FISHERIES: ECONOMICS, ENVIRONMENT OR RANDOMNESS? (Abstract ID: 28104 | Poster ID: 265)
Coral reef environments support a significant proportion of commercial fishing activities,
and are very important for the small-scale sector. These fisheries are essential for income
generation and food security of millions of people. Importantly, the targeted reef species
are associated with higher market values when compared to fishing resources in other
habitats. In addition, this resource are easy to access, making them less costly to catch.
Hence, the main goal of this study is to identify the main drivers of reef fisheries for
the small-scale sector. This knowledge is useful for developing effective management
plans that can economically benefit the fishers while ensuring the sustainability fish and
fisheries. A time series of landing data was used jointly with ex vessel price data and
environmental variables to conduct our analysis. Multivariate and Bayesian analysis are
performed to evaluate the possible association between species habitat and economic
factors. Specifically, we investigated the link between the temporal variation of important
commercial reef fish abundance, their ex vessel fish price and the associated environmental characteristics of the coral habitats. If it turns out that coral reef fisheries are driven
mainly by economic factors, managers will be able to choose a management instruments,
for instance, the use of seasonal closure carefully. On the other hand, if environmental
factors were more important, then climate change mitigation, for instance, will become a
bigger issue for managers’ to deal with in order to better protect reef fish supply.


INVESTIGATING ACUTE MONTIPORA WHITE SYNDROME: POTENTIAL
CAUSATIVE AGENTS, ENVIRONMENTAL DRIVERS, AND THE IMPORTANCE OF
CORAL HEALTH (Abstract ID: 28131 | Poster ID: 153)


Disease is a threat to coral reefs and exacerbates the widespread impacts of climate
change. Moreover, environmental stressors can increase prevalence of coral diseases.
Outbreaks of the tissue loss disease acute Montipora white syndrome (aMWS) have occurred in Montipora capitata, a major reef-building coral in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, which
may have been triggered by sewage runoff associated with rainfall and pre-existing stress
from a chronic tissue loss disease (cMWS). One of the potential etiological agents of
acute tissue loss within 3 weeks post-inoculation. When fragments already compromised
by cMWS were exposed to OCN003, 60% of the fragments switched to acute tissue loss
within 4 days post-exposure. Thus, OCN003 is more successful as a secondary pathogen
in laboratory experiments. Infections of cMWS are observed year-round, while aMWS
outbreaks have only occurred during the rainy winter months. Bacterial communities of
with high-throughput sequencing. Sequences from the family Enterobacteriaceae dominated all samples, which were similar to species that inhabit the human gastrointestinal
tract, suggesting sewage and/or freshwater input. This study describes the firstPseudoalteromonas sp. pathogenic to coral and possible bacterial communities consistent with
anthropogenic stressors associated with a fatal coral disease.

PERCEPTIONS IN SMALL ISLAND MARINE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (Abstract
ID: 28003 | Poster ID: 594)
Transformation to sustainable lifestyles demands integrative, inter- and transdisciplinary
approaches of science and stakeholder engagement. In these processes perceptions,
values and social norms play key roles in shaping behavioural outcomes. Often, environmental degradation and its far reaching impacts are consequences of human behaviour
such as environmental pollution and resource overuse. Understanding collective human
behaviour is thereby key for tackling global challenges. Taking the example of community- based marine resource management (CBMRM), this paper combines ecological
and psychological views on the challenges of participatory processes and calls for an
explicit integration of behavioural science expertise in transformational endeavours.
Societies and ecosystems do not change independently from each other, hence, a truly
transdisciplinary and workable approach is necessary whenever human beings aim at
sustainable interactions with ecosystems. This paper dissects factors that affect stakeholder perceptions, pathways and interpretations of information, and how these shape
social norms, and translate into behaviour. In making these factors explicit, we aim for a
workable approach for people working in sustainable resource use and management.



SHIPPING AND MARINE PILOTAGE: ARE THERE SUFFICIENT SYSTEMS IN
PLACE TO PROTECT VULNERABLE MARINE ECOSYSTEMS? (Abstract ID: 29946)
Like other vulnerable marine ecosystems, many coral reefs are situated in areas adjacent
to busy shipping routes and ports. High risk-industries, including those carrying risks to
the marine environment such as oil extraction and shipping, require many layered controls in place in order to prevent catastrophic accidents. Accidents can cause widespread
30

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

AHL variation profile, and that 3OHC4, 3OHC5 and 3OHC6 were most significantly affected. Influence of temperature variation was more significant on a global level than on
an individual species level for specific AHLs. 16S rRNA gene sequencing revealed that
most of the QS positive isolates were vibrios. The results from this research will assist
in decrypting the mechanism and etiology of one of the most destructive and intricate
coral diseases.

MITIGATION OF THERMAL AND LIGHT STRESSERS ON A MAURITIAN REEF
BY TROPICAL CYCLONIC CONDITIONS (Abstract ID: 29532)
Coral reef ecosystems are threatened due to global warming leading to widespread coral
bleaching. This study examined coral bleaching over 3 months (November to January)
during 3 years (2010-2013) in the dominant coral species, Acropora muricata, within the
coral reefs of Belle Mare, Mauritius in the South Indian Ocean at a finer scale including
three zones, namely near the coast (Z1), in the middle of the lagoon (Z2) and on the
reef flat (Z3). Data loggers were deployed next to the monitored coral colonies to record
in situ temperature and light levels. For the periods November 2010 – January 2011 and
November 2011 – January 2012, higher prevalence of temperatures above 30oC and
Z3. During November 2012 and January 2013, temperature and light recordings were
lower and almost no coral bleaching occurred compared to the previous two years. Tropical cyclonic conditions in the vicinity of Mauritius included only two tropical disturbances
occurred in January 2011, three cyclones occurred between December 2011 and January 2012, and five cyclones, passing closer to Mauritius, occurred between October 2012
and January 2013. These findings indicate that increased frequency of tropical cyclonic
conditions coinciding with the beginning of coral bleaching occurrence period mitigate
thermal and irradiance stresses, and reduce bleaching effects on coral reefs.


ARE WE APPROACHING A LIMIT OF RESILIENCE TO REPEAT BLEACHING OF
CORAL COMMUNITIES IN MAYOTTE, SW INDIAN OCEAN? (Abstract ID: 29252)
The island of Mayotte is in the core of a high marine biodiversity center for the Indian
Ocean, bathed by an intermittent gyre and dynamic meso-scale eddies that result in high
variability of water conditions, but within a relatively narrow temperature band. High levels of coral bleaching on the island have been documented 3 times (1983, 1998 & 2010)
and a fourth is imminent in 2016. The 2010 bleaching event was severe (SST at +0.59C),
affecting 52% of corals, with a final mortality estimated at 32%. Bleaching was strongly
zone-dependent, with the hottest regions in the north suffering significantly higher
bleaching and mortality than cooler regions in the south. Acropora was the dominant
genus, and dominated the bleaching response, followed by Pocillopora, Montipora and
Porites. Bleaching and mortality were strongly size-dependent, with larger colonies more
susceptible than smaller ones. The 2016 bleaching event is expected to be severe (SST
predicted at +0.84C), though the absence of bleaching in 2014 and 2015, which were
also record hot years equivalent to 1998, suggest some adaptation and acclimation has
occurred. Data will be collected using the same methods as in 2010, using 25*1 m belt
transects to record the condition of all hard corals (genus, size and degree of bleaching,
mortality and disease). We will focus on genus, size and region influences on bleaching
and mortality, and differences between the 2010 and 2016 events that may indicate
adaptation to increasing temperatures or the increasingly frequent major bleaching
events affecting Mayotte.


SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF EXPANDED HABITAT PROTECTION IN PULLEY RIDGE, FLORIDA GULF COAST (Abstract ID: 29666)
The Gulf of Mexico Fisheries Management Council designated Pulley Ridge as a HAPC
in 2005. Although Pulley Ridge is in relatively intact ecological condition, its rarity and
connectivity with the broader marine area lead agencies to believe that its protection
is necessary. A small portion of the Pulley Ridge is banned for bottom trawling, but
the agency is considering expanding its reach. The commercial fishers are extremely
sensitive to new or additional management actions as some of them are still recovering
from the Florida Keys sanctuary regulations of the 1990s. This paper is an attempt to
understand how the additional HAPC designations may influence commercial fishers
by analyzing their perceptions towards the new regulation, current harvests, and their
economic connections with different coastal zones of the Florida Gulf coast. A survey
of 50 commercial fishers is conducted. The secondary data on species-wise and vesselwise catches, and their flow to various port destinations are analyzed. The economic
impacts that the reductions in fish catch in the Pulley Ridge have on various economic
sectors of the region are also analyzed using a regional input-output model. The results
indicate that the HAPC expansion in Pulley Ridge will have some negative impacts on a
couple of fishing destinations in the Florida Gulf coast. However, the real management
challenge emanates from the negative experience the stakeholders suffered during the
past regulations. Efforts toward educating them about the long-term benefits of the current HAPC is therefore essential.


FROM MONITORING TO COMMUNITY-BASED MANAGEMENT: RESULTS FROM
THE ‘OPIHI PARTNERSHIP (Abstract ID: 29886)
The ‘Opihi Partnership, composed of community, academic, governmental and
non-governmental organizations, was constructed under a paradigm where all stakeholders are equal. The stakeholder members seek to understand and ultimately see the
replenishment of the highly sought after endemic limpets. There are several reasons for
the success and longevity of the ‘OP: incorporation of indigenous and western sciences,
long-term commitments from partners, each partner benefits from membership, and
yearly trips by members to Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument are but
a few. The ‘OP started with the modest goal of counting ‘opihi. This effort spawned numerous outreach and educational events, a mountain of data, and ultimately, action. Due
in part to their experiences in the ‘OP, members have moved toward actively managing
not only their ‘opihi, but a plethora of marine resources. Here we present a summary of
results and successes of the ‘Opihi Partnership. We further describe how the ‘OP model
can be generalized to the reef ecosystem level.


INFLUENCE OF TEMPERATURE VARIATION ON QUORUM SENSING SIGNAL
PRODUCTION BY BLACK BAND DISEASE HETEROTROPHIC BACTERIA (Abstract
ID: 29578)
Black band disease (BBD), one of the most aggressive and complex coral diseases,
is comprised of four functional groups of bacteria (photoautotrophs, sulfide oxidizers, sulfate reducers and heterotrophs) causing disease progression. The heterotrophs
have been shown to produce quorum sensing (QS) signal molecules, comprising of
acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs) known to be involved in pathogenesis of numerous
bacterial diseases worldwide. BBD infects corals when sea water temperature exceeds
on AHLs produced by heterotrophs from BBD to assess a potential role of QS in BBD
pathogenesis. 156 bacterial isolates from BBD, 38 from surface mucopolysaccharide
layer (SML) of healthy corals (HSML), and 36 from healthy SML of BBD infected
corals (BSML) were tested for production of AHLs by a reporter strain bioassay. 24 QS
positive heterotrophs were further exposed to varying temperatures (24°, 27°, 30° C) to
were discovered, 3OHC4 was the most abundant AHL (produced by 17 of 24 isolates),
shadowed by C6 (13 out of 24 isolates). Statistical analysis showed a species specific


A FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ALGAL ASSEMBLAGES ON THE GREAT BARRIER
ID: 28402)
We combine knowledge of macroalgal functional traits with abundance data from
960 surveys of macroalgae on the Great Barrier Reef in a novel approach to assess
effects of macroalgal assemblages on coral community dynamics. Cluster analysis of
the survey data identified 75 key macroalgal genera that contributed to 13 repeatedly
observed macroalgal assemblages. For these 75 genera we estimated the strengths of 24
traits likely to influence corals. Traits were selected for relevance to: the potential for an

31

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

assemblage to establish; competitive impacts on corals; impacts on coral recruitment;
potential to modify habitat; influence on stability of a macroalgal bloom. We combined
the abundance of genera present in each assemblage with the trait dataset to estimate
the effects of each macroalgal assemblage. Measures of functional diversity and community weighted mean were used to estimate the likely ecological effects of each of the
13 Great Barrier Reef macroalgal assemblages. In this way we combined data from field
surveys with the predictive strength of trait analysis to estimate likely community trends.
We suggest that benthic surveys which pay attention to localized macroalgal traits can
provide insight to future community interactions, impacts to coral recruitment, trends in
abundance of macroalgae and stability of macroalgal blooms, thus can provide valuable
guidance to management decisions.

THE SEA ANEMONE EXAIPTASIA AS A MODEL FOR CORAL MICROBIOME
STUDIES (Abstract ID: 27935)
A plethora of human diseases and much of human physiology have been elucidated by
studies using animal models. So too knowledge of scleractinian corals, in particular the
role of Symbiodinium, has been advanced by studies with the coral model Exaiptasia. Other
models could include the close scleractinian relative the Corallimorpharia and scleractinian coral cell cultures. All models are symbioses between an animal and a dinoflagellate
(Symbiodinium), but there are numerous distinguishing attributes which allow the researcher
to select one model over the others. For example, Exaiptasia can occur in the aposymbiotic state which is appealing when attempting to reveal the role of Symbiodinium in coral
phenotypes. Exaiptasia and Corallimorpharia have several traits in common like relative
ease of lab culture, ability to obtain a large number of clonal polyps, demonstration of
both sexual and asexual reproduction and formation of stable symbioses with a range of
Symbiodinium species. However, there is much more information on the biology and ecology and prolific genomic and proteomic data on Exaiptasia compared to Corallimorpharia.
Apart from assessments of coral bacterial pathogens, coral models have seldom been used
in coral fungal, prokaryote or viral studies. To address this paucity, we have grown Great
Barrier Reef sourced Exaiptasiafor 12 months in the laboratory. We will report its identity,
the Symbiodiniumtypes it harbours and features of its prokaryotic microbiome.


RESPONSES OF TWO SCLERACTINIAN CORALS TO METAL POLLUTION AND
OCEAN ACIDIFICATION (Abstract ID: 29880)
Metal pollution affects many reefs worldwide and while the effects of ocean acidification
alone or in combination with warming on coral metabolism have been extensively investigated, none of these studies consider that corals might be already affected by other
anthropogenic inputs, such as metal pollution. Here we tested in laboratory conditions
the combined effect of ocean acidification and cobalt concentrations on two corals:
Stylophora pistillata and Acropora muricata. Two pH levels (8.02 and 7.75) and two cobalt
concentrations (natural, 0.03 µg L-1 and polluted, 0.2 µg L-1) were tested during five weeks
in aquaria. For both species, cobalt input decreased significantly their growth rates by
was also measured in situ using benthic chamber experiments. At this concentration,
cobalt decreased both coral growth and photosynthetic rates. Even if no interaction
between pH and cobalt concentration have been revealed in our study, it is likely that
coral colonies, for which growth rates decrease when submitted to a moderate cobalt
metal pollution). To confirm or cancel these conclusions, additional benthic chamber
experiments have been performed on the same coral species to test the impacts of
realistic nickel inputs.


CORALME: A MODERN SYSTEM FOR TIME-EFFICIENT DETAILED ANNOTATION OF LARGE CORAL REEF IMAGE DATASETS IN AN OPERATIONAL SETTING (Abstract ID: 29697)
CoralMe is a collaborative open-source system dedicated to underwater coral reef
image annotation, with an emphasis on interactive and time efficient segmentation and
recognition techniques. The primary objective of the library is to connect ecological
monitoring initiatives with cutting-edge computer vision techniques through a lightweight, extensible, interoperable and robust system. Our contribution is twofold. First,
CoralMe offers a set of basic functionalities focused on automation that can be used in a
number of way, such as providing an enhanced user experience to speed up the task of
manual annotation, or to build a fully automated coral recognition model using existing
data. Second, CoralMe’s functionalities can be extended to support new algorithms with
little effort, rendering technological advances made by the computer vision community
readily available to marine ecology efforts. This is made possible by its architecture consisting in a MATLAB backend service easily extensible by computer vision researchers,
as well as a front-end API that makes use of the standard JSON-RPC communication
protocol to allow CoralMe’s integration to any existing software. CoralMe bridges the
gap between expert annotation and computer vision engineers, contributing to faster
development of reliable and precise measurement of coral resilience.


BOLSTERED PHYSICAL DEFENSES UNDER NUTRIENT ENRICHED CONDITIONS MAY FACILITATE A MACROALGAL SPECIES IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC
(Abstract ID: 28962 | Poster ID: 280)
Human manipulations of top-down and bottom-up processes, through nutrient
enrichment and overfishing, on coral reefs can cause a shift from dominance by corals
to macroalgae. Turbinaria ornata, a brown macroalga, is rapidly expanding in range
and habitat across the South Pacific, but the relative importance of nutrient input and
herbivory pressure, or an interaction between the two, in controlling its accumulation is
previously unknown. Therefore, we investigated the impact of nutrients and herbivory on
Turbinaria ornata. We conducted: 1) a mesocosm experiment assessing relative nutrient
limitation, 2) a field experiment comparing importance of nutrients (+/-) and herbivory
(+/-) to biomass accumulation, and 3) an herbivory assay and toughness test comparing
enriched and ambient thalli to assess changes to anti-herbivory defenses. We found no
nutrient addition deterred herbivores. However, when physical structure was removed,
enriched algae were preferred, with consumption rates 25-fold those of unenriched
algae. Additionally, enriched thalli were tougher than ambient thalli, suggesting physical
defenses were bolstered by nutrient enrichment. We found a unique interaction where
more prevalent on reefs in areas where it was once controlled by herbivory, possibly at
the expense of coral species.


BRYODIVERSITY IN REEFAL ENVIRONMENTS - WHAT CAN WE EXPECT THE
FUTURE TO HOLD? (Abstract ID: 28809)
The Phylum Bryozoa has been given inadequate attention in the tropical habitats,
including the reefal zones. Any estimates of biodiversity for this phylum are quite
inadequate at present, by comparison with the more spectacular groups. The reasons
for this knowledge gap include: the lack of discrimination of similar forms using optical
microscopy; the difficulty of field sampling of the most diverse habitats within the reef
ecosystem and the poor geographic spread of detailed sampling campaigns. Historical
studies which enthusiastically aggregated large synonymies have made biogeographic
analysis practically impossible at present. It would be desirable to estimate the biodiversity for bryozoans from each of the regions of coral-reef habitats, and to include
similar estimates for adjacent shelf and deeper-water environments. However, several
drawbacks make current estimates premature. In particular, sampling by SCUBA of
rubble-encrusting species has rarely been attempted. Important studies based upon
major sampling programs have provided monographs; however the taxonomic work is
in need of modern revision using scanning electron microscopic methods. Estimates
of bryozoan diversity derived from extrapolation from detailed sampling at extremely
few sites suggest that locations may be host to up to about 200 species. Wider regions
possibly attain up to 500 species. Tropical reef environments world-wide potentially
encompass 2000 to 4000 species, at least double what is known at present.
32

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



COMPARING MESOPHOTIC AND EUPHOTIC REEF FISH SIZE, FEEDING GUILD
(Abstract ID: 27973)
Mesophotic reefs (30-150m) are understudied habitats. Little is known about the fish
assemblages that occur at mesophotic depths and this dearth of information limits the
ability to understand and manage potential resources. Mesophotic reef assemblages in
the Au’au Channel between the islands of Maui and Lanai in the Hawaiian Islands were
compared with neighboring euphotic reef fish assemblages surveyed during 2007-2011.
Using three different survey methods for the mesophotic and one method for the euphotic, approximately 7,000 mesophotic and 800 euphotic fish individuals were identified
and their standard length estimated. In general, mesophotic fish were greater in both
body length (12.5 cm versus 7.0 cm) and mass (233 g versus 86 g). Fish in five of seven
feeding guilds were larger on the mesophotic reef although planktivores were larger on
euphotic reefs. Mesophotic fish assemblages had greater species richness (92 versus 66
species) and endemism, but euphotic fish assemblages were more diverse (Simpson’s
Index of Diversity: 0.93 versus 0.86).

Conservation management decisions are often implemented at the scale of human
communities, rather than the scale of the most relevant ecological dynamics. Research
frequently points out the loss in efficiency that results from such scale mismatches.
However, the scale of management is influenced by social, economic and political constraints on management actors; by the higher implementation costs of spatially-variable
management plans; and by the independent behaviour of actors. While it is clear that
objectives can be better achieved if management and ecological scales are aligned, it
is not clear whether such benefits are large enough to justify the costs of alignment,
or how alignment can be achieved in multi-actor contexts. On Manus Island in Papua
New Guinea, small customary tenure areas define the scale of harvest decisions, but
the populations in each area are demographically connected by pelagic larval dispersal.
Using genetic parentage analysis, we quantify the extent of this scale mismatch for the
scale and strength of dispersal should disincentivise sustainable harvesting behaviour,
since dispersal allows individual communities to externalise the costs of overharvesting
to adjacent communities. Despite these mismatched scales, communities in southern
Manus have created a tribal network for management and negotiation, emphasising the
importance of social capital in avoiding suboptimal outcomes or the need for top-down
governance.



QUANTIFYING CHEMICAL CHANGES IN THE “HEARTBEAT” OF A CORAL
REEF ON TETIAROA ATOLL, FRENCH POLYNESIA (Abstract ID: 29577 | Poster
ID: 240)

INNOVATIONS AND ADVANCEMENTS OF FISHERY-INDEPENDENT, VISUAL
MONITORING OF CORAL REEF FISHES FOR ECOSYSTEM-BASED MANAGEMENT (Abstract ID: 29612 | Poster ID: 578)

Anthropogenic carbon emissions have increased the threat of ocean acidification in
coral reef ecosystems and could translate to crippling losses in marine biodiversity
and other coastal ecosystem services. The ability to decode the complex and dynamic
biogeochemical signal of ocean acidification in reef environments will dramatically
increase our ability to identify the early signs of reef dissolution and manage the impacts
of ocean acidification in reef ecosystems. To capture the fine temporal changes in
reef chemistry that result from increasing ocean acidification, we have created a reef
observation network on Tetiaroa Atoll, French Polynesia. Limited human impacts on
this location make it an ideal setting for investigations of acidification on a pristine and
mature reef environment. Our experiments feature instruments that monitor seawater
pH, dissolved oxygen, and salinity at 15-minute intervals. We also conducted a series of
24-hr to 48-hr experiments to capture hourly variability in reef alkalinity, dissolved inorganic carbon, and nutrients. Preliminary analyses reveal a reproducible daily pattern in
which oxygen and pH diverge in the early evening, suggesting a pulse of reef dissolution
during this time. This phenomenon implies that certain portions of the reef may be more
susceptible to dissolution and degradation than others. We aim to continue quantitative
decomposition of our rich biogeochemical dataset collected over the last two years. The
ultimate aim is to quantify the rate of atoll growth or decline in the context of increasing
ocean acidification.

Reef management requires detecting population change and the effectiveness of
management intervention at small and large spatial scales. Innovations in 36 yr advanced non-destructive, diver-based visual monitoring of Florida reef fishes to support
ecosystem and length-based assessments. Shifting from an experimental design to a
random stratified survey allowed expanded coverage to the entire Florida shallow water
(<30m) reef track (1081 km2). Circular plots efficiently provided habitat data and species composition, abundance, size structure, and habitat distributions for ~275 observed
exploited and non-exploited reef-associated fish species. Improved digital benthic maps
facilitated defining habitat strata and quantification of georeferenced sample units and
domains. NITROX SCUBA increased bottom time and GPS navigation ensured precise
sample location. Sampling was optimized by a two-stage, stratification based on depth,
habitat type, management zone, and region. Advances include standard habitat classification based on habitat patchiness and relief, optimization based on sample variance
of 5 exploited fishes in 4 families, and use of mean exploited length for sustainability.
Iterative analyses of past data refined stratifications and future sample allocation for
increased efficiency and precision. Adopting a single standard method by multiple
institutions allowed pooling of limited resources to achieve wide geographic coverage
and ecosystem-level assessments of change within and outside MPAs, and influences of
hurricane disturbance, fishery regulations, and invasive fish.



PHOTOCONVERTIBLE CORAL FLUORESCENT PROTEINS: AN ADAPTATION TO
THE LIGHT CLIMATE AT MESOPHOTIC DEPTHS? (Abstract ID: 28591)

UNDERSTANDING THE INDO-PACIFIC BIODIVERSITY GRADIENT THROUGH
COMPARATIVE PHYLOGEOGRAPHY OF BRITTLESTARS (Abstract ID: 28314)

The high-level expression of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-like pigments in mesophotic corals suggests an important biological function for this protein group other than
the photoprotective role assigned to their homologues in shallow water cnidarians.
Photoconvertible fluorescent proteins (PCFPs), which undergo a green-to-red spectral
shift upon ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, are commonly found in mesophotic and depth
generalist species, thus providing an opportunity to investigate alternative functions. Due
to rapid attenuation of UV by the water column it is unknown, however, whether photoconversion can occur throughout the depth range of PCFP-containing corals. To assess
the feasibility of PCFPs as an adaptation to the mesophotic light field, we investigated
the spectral dependence of photoconversion bothin vivo and in vitro. Exposing live coral
colonies to different light spectra in a mesocosm experiment showed that photoconversion depends entirely on the presence of near-UV wavelengths. Using field irradiance

Understanding the mechanisms underlying biodiversity patterns is of crucial importance
in evolutionary and conservation biology. Here, we analyzed 15 widespread Indo-Pacific
brittlestar species using mitochondrial and nuclear sequences, and microsatellite markers,
to investigate the origin and evolution of biodiversity in the Indo-Pacific coral reefs, with
a focus on the effects of past climate changes on population demography and speciation
dynamics. Using Bayesian dating, Bayesian skyline plots, tests of simultaneous divergence
and expansion, and recent approaches of scenario testing, we revealed numerous cryptic
speciation events, an evolutionary hotspot in the South western Indian Ocean, shared
demographic responses to past events among species, and connectivity patterns across
the distinct Indo-Pacific biogeographic provinces. These results helped pinpointing areas
of evolutionary importance and past glacial refuges and overall, shed light on the effects
of past climate fluctuations on these reef organisms’ population dynamics.
33

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

building, and community-development programs. While no-take and fished control sites
had >35% macroalgal cover and <10% coral cover in 2004, the no-take protection
provided by the relatively-small (<1 km2) tabu areas established as part of the marine
management plan was sufficient to remove macroalgal cover and promote coral community recovery in the tabu areas, but not in adjacent fished areas. By 2012, coral cover
in tabu areas exceeded 50% and tabu areas had 500% more coral cover, 50% more coral
species, 50% more food fish species, and 500% more food fish biomass than adjacent
fished areas which now have >70% macroalgal cover. Simultaneously targeting community development priorities and economic needs strengthened support for resource
management and conservation actions. Strong traditional governance and inclusion of a
broad suite of stakeholders have been key factors for the success of community-based
resource management initiatives.

data from the Red Sea, we showed that photoconversion of purified proteins can occur
down to mesophotic depths and is thus feasible as a deep-water adaptation. These findings provide new insights into the biology and ecology of mesophotic corals, as well as
the function and regulation of coral fluorescent proteins.

VERTICAL CONNECTIVITY ON ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC REEFS: A GENOMEWIDE ASSESSMENT OF SIX DEPTH-GENERALIST CORAL SPECIES (Abstract ID:
29091)


Mesophotic coral ecosystems can act as important refuges against disturbances affecting
shallow reefs. Consequently, they have been hypothesized to aid in shallow reef recovery
by acting as a source of propagules. However, to date, this assumption of vertical
connectivity has only been tested for three different scleractinian coral species. Here,
we summarize the results of vertical connectivity assessments for six different depthgeneralist coral species (Agaricia fragilis, Agaricia lamarcki, Stephanocoenia intersepta,
Acropora aculeus, Seriatopora hystrix andPachyseris speciosa) from various locations in
the Western Atlantic (Bermuda, Bonaire, Curacao) and Indo-Pacific (Great Barrier Reef,
Coral Sea, Papua New Guinea). Using a modified RAD-seq approach that comprehensively removes endosymbiont contamination, we characterized genome-wide variation
(~20,000-150,000 SNPs) across ~1,500 individuals from paired shallow (10-15 m) and
deep (40-60 m) populations sampled at different locations and/or regions. Brooding
species all exhibited genome-wide differentiation by depth, indicative of varying degrees
of adaptive divergence. In contrast, differentiation in broadcasting species was mostly
observed across geographic regions and not by depth. These results establish the first
broader pattern demonstrating a contrasting potential for vertical connectivity based on
reproductive mode, and allow us to move towards a more generic characterization of
connectivity between shallow and mesophotic coral reefs.

PATTERN AND PROCESS IN TROPICAL FISH EXPATRIATION POLEWARD FROM
THE GREAT BARRIER REEF (Abstract ID: 27948)
I summarise patterns of recruitment and persistence of coral-reef fishes along the SE
Austrian temperate coastline establishes over a 16-year monitoring period. Recruitment intensity in southern locations is weakly related to East Australian Current
(EAC) strength, with temporal patterns differing among key families (Chaetodontidae,
Pomacentridae, Acanthuridae) and among the over 100 species recorded to date. A key
bottleneck to population establishment at higher latitudes is winter water temperature,
and recruitment and establishment of these species is related to site wave exposure. Life
history characteristics of species and families also are good predictors of high latitude
recruitment. Expected changes to EAC strength and sea surface temperature along this
coastline are linked to measured patterns in growth and pelagic dispersal to suggest
changes in the dynamics of this process under climate change.

THE SUNSCREEN SHEEN: AN ASSESSMENT OF THE PRESENCE AND QUANTITY OF ORGANIC UV-FILTERS IN THE WATERS OFF WAIKIKI BEACH (Abstract
ID: 28928 | Poster ID: 464)


Organic UV filters are known endocrine disruptors that interfere with larval and embryonic development, reproduction and gender determination in marine invertebrates,
fishes, rodents and humans. They find their way into the environment via plastic and
personal care product waste. When humans enter the ocean after applying sunscreens
with organic UV-filters as their active ingredient they eventually wash off, directly
entering the marine environment. In 2015, the state of Hawai'i received over 4.8 million
visitors, over 3.6 million spending time on O'ahu, home to the famous Waikiki Beach
and many other beaches that experience high visitor frequency, most of whom use
sunscreen products with organic UV-filters. Few studies have attempted to quantify
the presence of organic UV-filters in the nearshore waters of O'ahu. The present study
aims to detect and quantify the following organic UV-filters: avobenzone, homosalate,
octocrylene and oxybenzone in an effort to understand their prevalence and persistence
in Waikiki's nearshore waters. Water samples will be collected on and 60cm below the
surface at various locations along Waikiki Beach every three hours from 0600-2400.
Analytes will be extracted using reverse phase solid phase extraction and analyzed using
triple quadrupole liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy. By detecting these organic
UV-filters, we hope to spread awareness of the possible effects these compounds might
have on biological systems, specifically nearby coral reef communities that experience
constant exposure due to high visitor frequency.

HABITAT LOSS REDUCES THE ABUNDANCE AND SPECIES RICHNESS OF
CORAL REEF FISH RECRUITS REGARDLESS OF HABITAT CONFIGURATION
(Abstract ID: 29202)
Habitat loss is a spatially complex process that not only reduces the total amount of
habitat available, but also changes the spatial configuration of the remaining habitat.
and isolation of habitat patches, however the influence of these configuration changes
relative to those of habitat loss are unknown. In this study we measured the independent
and interactive effects of habitat loss, fragmentation, and isolation on the abundance and
species richness of coral reef fish recruits. Replicate experimental seascapes were constructed with either control or a 50% reduction in habitat cover and cross-factored with
two levels of fragmentation (9 or 18 habitat patches) or isolation (3m or 15m spacing
between patches). Recruitment was surveyed after three months and data was pooled
across patches to provide a seascape-level estimate of effects on total fish abundance,
species richness, and individual species. Habitat loss resulted in a 60% decline in total
abundance and 25% decline in species richness, regardless of levels of fragmentation or
isolation. Most species declined with the 50% reduction in habitat, but exhibited variable
responses to changing habitat configuration. Overall, most species were unaffected by
fragmentation but responded positively to increased isolation, though this positive effect
was in some cases restricted to treatments with higher habitat cover. These findings
emphasize prevention of habitat loss for reef fish conservation in a changing world.



DESIGN OF CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION MEASURES FOR A CORAL LAGOON BEACH IN MAURITIUS (Abstract ID: 29263 | Poster ID: 449)
Mon Choisy in northwestern Mauritius is an economically important public beach
enjoyed by locals and tourists. Chronic erosion has resulted in the loss of up to 20 m of
beach width in 40 years and is likely to increase in coming years due to global sea level
rise, severely impacting beach amenity and economic viability. In 2014, the Government of Mauritius and UNDP, supported by the Adaptation Fund, initiated a project
to analyze the causes of erosion at Mon Choisy and provide rehabilitation options. A
comprehensive technical assessment incorporating physical and biological surveys,
instrumental data collection and calibrated numerical modeling suggest that the erosion
is caused primarily by the interruption of sediment supply from existing coastal works
and the degradation of coral and seagrass habitats due to anthropogenic and natural
factors, resulting in increased wave energy penetration into the lagoon, sediment mobility

29796)
Community-based resource management can be an effective approach for biodiversity
conservation and replenishing depleted reef fish stocks, particularly on Pacific islands
whose indigenous communities have significant control over their resources. The customary fishing rights owners in Fiji’s Coral Coast district of Korolevu-i-wai began marine
co-management activities with the Fiji Locally-Managed Marine Areas Network in 2002.
In 2005, this effort was bolstered by the integration of a community-based supporting
organization that has facilitated the implementation of a suite of research, capacity-

34

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

and therefore result in a mosaic of dead and live corals. In this study we investigated how
an ongoing outbreak of the crown-of-thorns seastar affected the distribution of a common reef fish, Pomacentrus moluccensis. We identified reefs with a range of coral damage
moluccensis on live coral colonies were greater with increasing proportions of dead coral.
In addition, we describe how fish start occupying dead coral when >50% of colonies
on a reef were dead. We suggest that the loss of habitat causes crowding on remnant
live coral until some fish are forced to choose less preferred dead colonies. We then
conducted a choice experiment to investigate if density dependent habitat selection was
the mechanism underlying this pattern. When presented with the choice of two colonies,
fish were more likely to choose a near empty alternate colony when the other colony
was severely crowded with conspecifics. This study is the first to demonstrate density
dependent habitat selection during an ongoing disturbance event and adds to the growing body of work outlining how reef fish communities are affected by disturbances.

and decreased production of coralline sand. Remedial measures proposed include the
removal of Casuarina trees, beach reprofiling and replanting with native sand binding
and coastal forest species, sand nourishment, low crested breakwaters for wave energy
dissipation, seagrass rehabilitation, and the designation of a Voluntary Marine Conservation Area. While these measures may reduce erosion and result in a more resilient beach,
they do not address the underlying causes of the erosion, highlighting the need for
funding agencies to consider longer term programs with broader reach in order to fully
address the threats to coral lagoon beaches.

POPULATION ECOLOGY OF THE RED SEA LIONFISH PTERIOS MILES IN ITS
NATIVE RANGE (Abstract ID: 27952)


Research of the lionfish introduction into the western Atlantic and Caribbean seas has revealed this species to be the most successful marine fish invader ever documented. To better understand the potential ecological reasons for this unprecedented invasion, we studied
various population parameters of Pterois miles in its native habitat by tagging 36 individuals
among a fringing reef in Egypt in October 2014. Initial recapture success exceeded 60% of
fish tagged, but gradually declined to 10% by November 2015. Mean juvenile growth rates
ranged from 7.8 to 10.2mm per month in summer, while adults (TLmax 32cm) had relatively
constant growth rates of about 4mm per month throughout the year. In August, several
adults had ripe gonads indicating that reproduction was about to take place. Site fidelity was
strong with 50–100% of fish being recaptured at the initial tagging site while the remaining
fish were recaptured within a 60m radius. To identify potential biotic constraints in the Red
Sea, juveniles (TL <10cm) were caught and released near potential predators. Stonefish,
moray eels, and several groupers ignored lionfish. Other groupers exhibited aggressive behaviors and continuously attacked until lionfish swam upwards into the water column using
the current to drift away. Actual predation was not observed, suggesting habitat competition
plays an important role in lionfish distribution. These observations provide new insights into
population ecology of lionfish in their natural habitats that can improve our understanding
of the distributions of invasive populations.

EXAMINING THE WIDE BAND FREQUENCY RESPONSES OF COMMON REEF
FISHES- COMPARISONS BETWEEN MODELS AND MEASUREMENTS (Abstract
ID: 29418)
Many heavily exploited fishes are crucial to the ecosystem function of reefs. A central
challenge to quantifying change in coral reefs and their ecosystem services is the acquisition of spatially and temporally appropriate data to examine patterns in diversity and
abundance of coral reef fishes, and in particular exploited target species. Wideband
acoustic technology offers a promising tool that might allow inference at relevant
taxonomic and spatiotemporal scales. Using the boundary element method with highresolution computed tomography data, we examine numerically modeled acoustic
scattering responses (12-250 kHz) of dominant reef fishes across a range of orientations.
The modeled wideband scattering responses are compared with in situ measurements
of wideband scattering from reef fishes obtained using the Simrad EK80 echosounder.
Preliminary analyses suggest that wideband scattering responses in this frequency range
are sensitive to the fine-scale morphological variations among common reef fish species.
Further analysis will give insight into the appropriate frequency domain to examine the
efficacy for taxonomic resolution.



QUANTIFYING PROJECT IMPACTS AND MITIGATION OFFSETS BY PARTITIONING ECOSYSTEM FUNCTIONS AND SERVICES (Abstract ID: 28998 | Poster ID:
688)

THE SCLERACTINIAN CORAL FAUNA OF MOOREA (FRENCH POLYNESIA) :
STABILITY OVER TIME VERSUS ENVIRONMENTAL DISTURBANCES ? (Abstract
ID: 28532)

Federally permitted projects that result in significant and specific loss of resources
important to the human or aquatic environment are required to mitigate for that loss.
The difficulty of defining linkages between project activities and their effects often leads
to a controversial accounting of ecosystem value. Particularly on large public projects,
selection of the type and scale of mitigation is often negotiated as final permits are
either granted or denied. A rubric is needed to fairly balance the environmental cost of
development against the benefits of mitigation using a common currency. This two-fold
problem requires a correct assessment of the environmental impacts of development
and the appropriate design of mitigation to offset losses. The 2008 Compensatory Mitigation rule does not require compensation for the loss of specific resources, but rather
for aquatic resource “types, functions and services”. Here we propose a methodology
that focuses upon defining ecosystem functions and services threatened by proposed
projects, and selection of the mitigation type and quantity needed to maintain ecosystem
balance. Using the framework from the Millennium Environmental Assessment (MEA,
2005), the impact site is parsed into 27 ecosystem categories divided between Regulating and Support Functions, and Provisioning and Cultural Services. Analysis of each
category allows the actual likely project impacts to be standardized in common terms.
Knowledge of the specific ecosystem functions and services impacted enables resource
agencies to select mitigation options that match the values and quantities of ecosystem
functions and services jeopardized by the proposed project.

An inventory of the scleractinian coral fauna in the reefs surrounding the island of
Moorea (French Polynesia) was conducted in 1978 by Kühlmann and the results
published by Chevalier & Kühlmann (1983). In order to provide a reference collection for
the research on coral reef being presently conducted at the CRIOBE, a comprehensive
sampling survey was carried out in 2012, around Moorea, including most sites visited 34
years earlier by Kühlmann. In the intervening period numerous changes have affected
the reef environment. These include direct and indirect anthropic disturbances, most of
them linked to a sharp increase in the resident and transient (tourist) population, resulting
in a general anthropisation of the shoreline, including landfill and coral sand and rock
extraction. Further, several significant natural disturbances have taken place during
that period, such as episodes of severe Acanthaster infestations, recurrent bleaching
events, cyclones and protracted episodes of abnormally low sea level. Yet the qualitative
comparison of the results obtained 34 years apart indicates very little overall difference
in scleractinian diversity. Indeed, except for two species not found in 2012 but whose
presence has been ascertained on the nearby island of Tahiti, the species lists are almost
identical. The only notable difference is recorded for the family Acroporidae, particularly
the genus Acropora. Hypotheses as to the mechanisms underlying relative stability
of the scleractinian fauna around Moorea are presented, and consequences for reef
management are discussed.


DENSITY DEPENDENT HABITAT SELECTION DICTATES DISTRIBUTION OF
REEF FISH FOLLOWING HABITAT LOSS (Abstract ID: 28497)

MICROBIAL METABOLIC SHIFTS DURING IN-SITU DEVELOPMENT OF CORAL
BLACK BAND DISEASE (Abstract ID: 29044)

Habitat loss governs the distribution of species on a coral reef by altering the availability
of resources. While we know that complete loss of habitat has severe negative effects on
reef fish communities, we know relatively little of how species respond to patchy disturbances. This is surprising given that many threats facing coral reefs have a species bias,

Black band disease (BBD) is a virulent, globally-distributed infectious disease characterised by a darkly pigmented polymicrobial band at the interface between apparently
normal coral tissue and freshly exposed skeleton. Microbial taxonomic profiles for BBD

35

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

have been extensively characterised, but the underlying microbial metabolic functions
that contribute to anoxic and sulphide-rich microenvironments within the lesion and
govern its pathogenicity have not been documented. Combined metagenomic and
metatranscriptomic profiling of microbial lesions at two stages in BBD development
were sampled from replicate coral colonies: 1) a less-virulent precursor stage termed
cyanobacterial patches, and 2) a fully developed BBD lesion. The development of BBD
pathogenicity is linked to relative increases in production of sulfide within the lesion by
sulfate-reducing bacteria, and to photosynthetic CO2-fixation by cyanobacteria. The
latter play a pivotal role in pathogenesis by introducing organic carbon in addition to nutrients derived from dead coral tissue. Furthermore, heterotrophic bacterial degradation
of organic carbon produced by cyanobacteria represents a key mechanism for the depletion of dissolved oxygen within BBD lesions to levels harmful to underlying coral tissue,
especially in the absence of light. The increased mechanistic understanding of BBD
development provided by this ‘omic’-based study highlights the complexity of microbial

ACROPORA CERVICORNIS TRANSPLANTS AS FISH HABITAT AND AS A POSITIVE
INFUENCE TO FISH RECRUITMENT ON CARIBEAN REEFS (Abstract ID: 30139)
No-take MPAs have been established widely as a fisheries restoration measure and to
reestablish the ecological balance essential to coral reef health over time. However,
where Caribbean Acropora cervicornis corals have become locally extinct, they do not
return on their own through larval recruitment processes. For such situations, staghorn
Acropora transplantation may be required in order for the natural balance of the MPA
to be obtained, resulting in restored fish and invertebrate populations by increasing
vital branching coral habitat. From the perspective of evaluating coral transplantation
as a potential coral reef and fisheries management tool, the specific impacts of coral
transplantation on fish populations is of fundamental importance, particularly for reefs
suffering from algal overgrowth or other ecological imbalance due to low fish numbers.
If a lack of fish is related to a lack of habitat, Acropora transplantation could potentially
be important in reestablishing fish populations that would then help reestablish a broader
ecological balance and lead to conditions more conducive to recovery. Specific interactions between coral transplants and fish recruits are investigated in this study, focusing on
the following questions: 1. what fish families, size, and numbers do coral transplants on
rock, rubble, or sand, or seagrass substrates provide?, 2. does proximity to the reef (<3m,
>30m) or substrata effect fish numbers, diversity, or initial recruitment size to coral transplants?, and 3. does the relative number of fish recruits influence coral health or growth?


LATITUDINAL VARIATION IN SPAWNING SYNCHRONY OF ACROPORA CORALS
(Abstract ID: 28955)


Reproductive synchrony is a feature of many plant and animal populations. High
reproductive synchrony between species of scleractinian corals is known to occur in a
wide range of locations in the world. Levels of synchrony are, however, variable between
locations. It has often been suggested that the synchrony is driven by environmental
variables correlated with latitude, such as water temperature, insolation and photoperiod.
We here develop a method to quantify spawning timing and synchrony, and apply it on
a large dataset that compiles Indo-Pacific Acropora reproductive data from 152 reefs in
spawning synchrony in Indo-Pacific Acropora species correlates with latitude. We found
no correlation between synchrony and latitude, which further supports the hypothesis
that synchronous spawning is a feature of all speciose assemblage. Although it is well-accepted that variables such as water temperatures and lunar cycles strongly influence the
seasonality and timing of coral reproduction, the exact factors that determine the level
of synchrony within and among populations remain to be identified, potentially involving
factors other than environmental ones, such as socio-biological or ecological ones.

REPLACING BARBIE’S NOTEBOOK: HOW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY IS REVOLUTIONIZING DATA COLLECTION IN SMALL SCALE FISHERIES (Abstract ID: 30054)
The collection of fisheries data from small scale fisheries has historically been a challenge for national governments. The technical and financial investment required to
sustain data collection across scores of communities whose fishers target complex multispecies fisheries, often with a low catch value has not been an obvious priority when
allocating limited national budgets. In the last few years however the advent of low cost
cloud computing and the widespread adoption of smart phones in rural areas means
that the technology exists to revolutionize data collection and vastly improve the ability
and cost effectiveness of collecting, analyzing and disseminating fisheries information
at national scales. Here, I present case studies from both the Caribbean and South East
Asia where a simple to use data collection system built around a mobile App, a solar
powered vessel monitoring device and a digital registration system, have been deployed
across large geographic areas to capture high resolution data on a range of small scale
fisheries. I explore the challenges presented by moving record keeping from note books
to the cloud, the need for careful design in technology to overcome barriers in literacy
and language, and the development of data management pipelines and automated systems to collate, analyze, interpret and disseminate data in near real time. The approach
is rapidly increasing our understanding of how fishers use the seascape and coral reef
resources, empowering decision makers at all levels and enabling science to underpin
small scale fisheries management.


EFFECTS OF OCEAN WARMING AND CO2-INDUCED ACIDIFICATION ON
CALCIFICATION OF FOUR CARIBBEAN REEF-BUILDING CORALS (Abstract ID:
28700)


Rising atmospheric carbon dioxide (pCO2) has caused ocean temperature to increase
and pH to decrease, raising concerns about the health of marine organisms. Corals are
particularly vulnerable to these stressors, likely due to their narrow thermal tolerance and
use of carbonate ions in calcification, although response patterns vary across taxa. We
conducted controlled laboratory experiments for approximately 90 days to investigate
the independent and interactive effects of ocean warming (28, 31 C) and acidification
on the calcification rate and skeletal properties of four keystone Caribbean reef-building
corals (Pseudodiploria strigosa, Siderastrea siderea, Porites astreoides, Undaria tenuifolia)
collected from the Belize Mesoamerican Barrier Reef. Aragonite saturation states of 3.9,
3.2, 2.2, and 0.7 constrained by total alkalinity measured via closed-cell potentiometric titration and dissolved inorganic carbon measured via coulometry, were attained by sparging natural seawater with air-CO2 mixtures formulated at 280, 400, 700, and 2800 ppm
pCO2, respectively. Temperature and pCO2 were fully crossed with three-fold treatment
replication. Calcification rates for all species exhibited a generally decreasing trend with
increasing pCO2, although this trend was not always linear. The negative effects of pCO2
skeletal dissolution in the treatments that was undersaturated with respect to aragonite,

EVALUATING TRADE-OFFS BETWEEN FISHERIES HARVEST AND CORAL REEF
RESILIENCE (Abstract ID: 29926)
Reef fisheries are required to take an ecosystem approach to their management, yet
informing management with policies that avoid ecosystem impacts is challenging in
highly complex systems, particularly if the target species serve an important ecosystem
function. Caribbean coral reefs provide a classic example where herbivorous fish are
an important fishery but depletion can elicit cascading impacts that lock reefs into
degraded states. To date, scientists have recommended bans on parrotfish exploitation
but this simply isn’t politically or economically feasible in the majority of countries. A
fisheries policy is needed that permits exploitation while limiting the impact on reef resilience. We modelled the impacts of a parrotfish fishery on the future state and resilience
of Caribbean coral reefs, enabling us to quantify the trade-offs between harvest and ecosystem health. We find that implementation of a simple and enforceable size restriction
of > 30 cm provides a win:win outcome in the short term, delivering both ecological and
fisheries benefits leading to increased yield and greater coral recovery rate for a given
harvest rate. However, maintaining resilient coral reefs even until 2030 requires the addition of harvest limitations (< 10% of virgin fishable biomass) to cope with a changing
climate and induced coral disturbances, even in relatively healthy reefs today. Managing
parrotfish fisheries is not a panacea for protecting coral reefs from climate change but it
can play a role in sustaining the health of reefs and high quality habitat for reef fisheries.

36

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


coral reef ecosystems, weighing management options and communicating status and
goals. Decision-makers can use the BCG to determine which level most appropriately
describes the current condition of their reefs and what conditions are desired, and can
set easily communicated, quantitative goals for achieving those conditions. A variety of
coral reef management activities can be supported by combining biological assessment and a coral reef BCG: these include water quality standards and condition status
(excellent, good, fair, poor), pollution management (point source and non-point source),
dredge-and-fill permitting, risk assessment to aquatic life from hazardous waste sites,
risks to threatened and endangered species, environmental impact assessment and
fisheries.

SOCIAL RESILIENCE AND THE BUSINESS CASE FOR INCREASING INVESTMENT IN WASTEWATER TREATMENT: THE IMPORTANCE OF INTEGRATING
EFFECTS ON NATURAL CAPITAL (Abstract ID: 30019)
Natural capital is Earth’s stock of natural assets, including land, air, water and living
decline due to the negative impact of wastewater pollution. It is becoming more broadly
understood that the degradation of natural capital can have significant impacts on the
long-term environmental and economic resilience of a community. Therefore, in an
effort to strengthen support for investment in critically needed wastewater infrastructure,
the value of ecosystem services). However, coral reefs and other natural resources also
have a quantifiable cultural value, and their degradation erodes cultural natural capital
– a critical component of a community’s social resilience. This is reflected in a global
paradigm shift in international development priorities, with capital investment decisions
resting increasingly on a more thorough assessment of project impacts that accounts
for the link between social resiliency and a community’s economic and environmental
resilience. Our paper seeks to demonstrate that project stakeholders can leverage a
business case approach to evaluating wastewater infrastructure projects with a focus on
conserving existing, and creating new, natural capital.



LOW BUT STABLE REEF SHARK POPULATION ABUNDANCE AND DENSITY AT
AN UNFISHED CORAL REEF (Abstract ID: 28401)
Baseline population estimates are lacking for many marine species, especially large
predators such as reef sharks. The grey reef shark (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos), which
is listed as Near Threatened on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, is highly
mobile and therefore particularly difficult to monitor. We used spatial capture-recapture
(SCR) models, which incorporate movement effects, to produce the first spatially explicit,
baseline population abundance and density estimates of grey reef sharks at Palmyra
estimated a mean density of 17-21 grey reef sharks/km2, which translates to a total
population size of 6261-8344 sharks at Palmyra. Shark abundance was stable through
the course of the eight-year study, and shark distribution was non-uniform giving rise
to density hotspots. Our density estimate is at least an order of magnitude lower than
previous estimates at Palmyra based on data from spatially limited underwater diver
surveys. Pristine coral reef locations have been characterized as having ‘inverted trophic
pyramids’, yet this concept may be based on potential overestimates of apex predators
from visual surveys in these systems. In addition, the insights from this study suggest adjusting reef shark recovery targets, as present targets are likely unrealistic and therefore
impossible to achieve. At the same time, harvest quotas warrant similar downgrading to
prevent continued overexploitation of reef sharks.

LARGE-SCALE, LONG-TERM INTERDISCIPLINARY ECOSYSTEM ASSESSMENT
Effective ecosystem-based management and conservation of coral reefs requires information about what ecological resources are available, where those resources are located,
how and why those resources are changing over time, how those resources are utilized
and valued by people and communities, and how human activities, including climate
change, are effecting the sustainability of the ecosystems. Since 2000, NOAA’s Coral
Reef Ecosystem Program, in partnership with Federal, State, and Territorial agencies
and academic and non-governmental institutions, has been mapping, monitoring, and
conducting applied research to provide these types of information to support sustainable
management of the coral reef ecosystems of Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, the
island ecosystems monitor the abundance, diversity, size, and condition of corals, other
invertebrates, algae, fishes, and microbes, as well oceanographic and environmental
conditions and human uses influencing them. Use of systematic and consistent methods
across diverse gradients of biodiversity, oceanographic conditions, and human uses and
impacts allows an unprecedented opportunity to perform comparative biogeographic
and socio-ecological analyses. We will discuss how these analyses can inform efforts
by fisheries and coastal resource managers to effectively implement ecosystem-based
management to achieve a balance between ecological and human well-being.


USING BIOCRITERIA AND THE BIOLOGICAL CONDITION GRADIENT TO PROTECT CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 28688 | Poster ID: 616)


Biological assessments (surveying the presence, number, size and condition of fish,
corals, algae, plants, and other biota) provide important information about the health and
integrity of coral reef ecosystems. Biological criteria are a way of describing the qualities
that must be present to support a desired condition in a waterbody and serve as the
standard against which assessment results are compared. A Biological Condition Gradient (BCG) provides explicit characterization of how attributes of the biological system
change as human disturbance increases, establishing clear and scientifically defensible
narratives for different levels of biological condition. Comparing results of biological
assessments with BCG thresholds is an effective approach for evaluating the integrity of

HERBIVOROUS GRAZING IN A NEW DIMENSION: THE IMPORTANCE OF
MICRO-TOPOGRAPHIC COMPLEXITY (Abstract ID: 27994)
On coral reefs, the grazing pressure exerted by herbivorous fishes is a major determinant of
benthic community structure. Using a trait-based experimental approach, we demonstrate
that previous schemes of herbivore functional diversity are missing a key component of
coral reef consumer-producer dynamics. Specifically, we show that micro-topographic
refuges and the functional identity of herbivores that are able to exploit resources within
37

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

these refuges strongly affect benthic community development. Within refuges, benthic
communities are grazed by a small suite of functionally similar species, which only crop the
apical portion of algae. In contrast, surfaces outside of refuges are grazed by a wide range
of species from various functional groups, including species that extract the entire epilithic
algal matrix or its particulate component. This functional filtering results in two separate
grazing regimes, which create distinct coexisting benthic assemblages: assemblages within
refuges are diverse, supporting several types of algae as well as juvenile scleractinian
corals, while communities outside refuges feature low diversity assemblages dominated by
