determining resilience of the coral-symbiont network when faced with increasing sea
surface temperatures due to global climate change.


edu

IMPACTS OF 6 YEARS OF HERBIVORE PROTECTION AT KAHEKILI HERBIVORE
FISHERIES MANAGEMENT AREA (KHFMA), MAUI (Abstract ID: 28384)
In response to concerns about declining coral cover and recurring macroalgal blooms,
the State of Hawaii established the KHFMA in 2009. Within the KHFMA, herbivorous
fishes and sea urchins are protected, but other fishing is allowed. We conducted surveys
at KHFMA and comparison sites around Maui since 19 months before closure, and
covering 6 years of herbivore protection. Over that period, mean parrotfish and surgeonfish biomass increased within the KHFMA, by 139% and 28% respectively. Most of
those gains have been of small-to-medium species, whereas large-bodied species have
not recovered, likely due to low-level poaching on what are preferred fishery targets
in Hawaii. Nevertheless, coincident with rises in herbivore biomass, crustose coralline
algal (CCA) cover has increased from ~2% before closure to ~ 15% in 2015. Biomass of
unprotected families did not change in the KHFMA, and there were no similar changes
in parrotfish or CCA at 12 comparison sites around Maui. In spite of positive signs, it is
unclear how effective the KHFMA might eventually be for its ultimate goal of coral recovery. Coral cover declined from 39.6% to 32.9% between 2008 and 2012, with nearly

CORAL REHABILITATION IN SOUTH SULAWESI: HIGH CORAL GROWTH ON
SIMPLE MODULAR STRUCTURES (Abstract ID: 27801)
Coral rehabilitation is an important conservation approach in the face of continuing
destructive fishing practices in the Coral Triangle, even in Marine Protected Areas.
Indonesia, the site of our pilot project, has protected ~32% of its reef habitat; however,
much reef habitat is too damaged or disturbed to set aside as MPAs, thus necessitating
rehabilitation. We present a pilot coral rehabilitation at Pulau Badi, Spermonde Islands,
South Sulawesi. The rehabilitation consists of modular hexagonal frames (‘spiders’) of
epoxy-and-sand-coated rebar secured in the substratum by legs. Coral fragments from

372

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

extreme levels of disease, we compare baselines and outbreak thresholds for five
that most strongly influence disease prevalence unravel factors potentially driving these
patterns. Identification of empirically-derived, shelf-specific disease thresholds signifying
moderate and severe disease risk are critical for informed management of factors driving
deteriorating coral health.

storm and fishing damage (and some from small nursery areas) are secured to the
spiders with cable ties. The units allow stabilization of the bottom while providing open
water flow around the corals. Approximately 10000 spiders were deployed over 16000
square meters, primarily in long stretches damaged by blast fishing but also in small
gaps created by cyanide fishing or other damage. Live coral (primarily acroporid) cover
increased from 20% two months after establishment to 82% nearly a year later. Villagers
build and help deploy spiders as a supplemental livelihood to fishing, and community
engagement and law enforcement to protect reefs have increased, although cyanide fishing of ornamental fishes inhabiting the rehabilitation has become a problem. Currently,
fragment supply does not limit rehabilitation but the future goal is to deploy nurseryraised and/or stress tolerant species and to expand the rehabilitation to other sites in the
Spermonde Islands.



INFLUENCE OF NURSERY HABITAT ON THE ABUNDANCE OF A CORAL REEF
FISH (Abstract ID: 27834)
The availability of suitable habitat can have a profound effect on the abundance of coral
reef fish, particularly those that are habitat specialists. Habitat requirements are however
likely to vary with ontogeny, some species associating with specific nursery habitats,
and the importance of nursery relative to adult habitats for shaping future abundances
remains unclear. Moreover, populations may be influenced by supply of new recruits
and any assessment of habitat importance should also consider the effects of supply. We
conducted surveys at 16 sites, spanning 200km of the Ningaloo coast, to identify habitat
preferences of juvenile, sub-adult and adult damselfish Pomacentrus moluccensis. We
then combine information on habitat preferences at different life history stages with six
years of information on juvenile abundance and habitat availability to assess the relative
show that juvenile habitat at the time of settlement (corymbose corals) is the strongest
adult/ sub-adult habitat (branching corals), and changes in juvenile abundance were both
poor predictors of future abundance. These findings provide empirical evidence of the
value of nursery habitats relative to supply of juveniles and emphasize the importance
of identifying and protecting these habitats for the conservation of coral reef fish.

LARGE-SCALE, MULTI-DIRECTIONAL LARVAL CONNECTIVITY AMONG GROUPER POPULATIONS IN THE GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE PARK (Abstract ID:
29092)
Larval dispersal is the key process by which populations of most marine fishes and
invertebrates are connected and replenished. Advances in larval tagging and genetics
have increased our capacity to track larval dispersal, assess population connectivity,
and quantify larval exchange among no-take marine reserves and fished areas. Recent
studies have demonstrated that reserves can be a significant source of recruits for
populations up to 40 km away, but the scale and direction of larval connectivity across
larger seascapes remain unknown. We applied genetic parentage analysis to resolve
larval dispersal patterns for two exploited coral reef groupers (Plectropomus maculatus
km within the southern Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, Australia. A total of 86 juvenile
Plectropomus spp. were genetically assigned to their parents on reefs within the study
area. We identified both short-distance (200 m to 50 km) larval dispersal trajectories
within regions, and long-distance (50 km to 254 km), multi-directional larval dispersal
trajectories among regions. Larval exchange between reserve and non-reserve reefs
indicated substantial mixing among management zones and the provision of recruitment
subsidies from reserves to fished areas. Our findings suggest that both local-scale selfreplenishment and regional-scale connectivity contribute to the maintenance of grouper
populations in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park.

INTRASPECIFIC VARIABILITY IN LIFE HISTORY TRAITS OF FISHES BETWEEN
SHALLOW CORAL REEFS AND MESOPHOTIC CORAL ECOSYSTEMS IN THE
CENTRAL PACIFIC OCEAN (Abstract ID: 28258)
Many inhabitants of mesophotic coral ecosystems (MCEs), such as reef fishes, represent
a lower depth distribution of their species as they are also found occupying shallow
coral reefs in relatively close geographic proximity. Research on fishes associated with
MCEs is sparse; hence there is a critical lack of knowledge of how reef fish found at
mesophotic depths may vary from their shallow reef complements. We investigated
intraspecific variability in growth, reproductive potential and energy partitioning of
three Hawaiian endemics collected from shallow, photic reefs and MCEs throughout
the Hawaian Archipelago and Johnston Atoll: the detritivorous goldring surgeonfish
Ctenochaetus strigosus, and the planktivorous threespot chromis Chromis verater and
Hawaiian dascyllus Dascyllus albisella. The von Bertalanffy growth function was used to
establish species-specific growth models using otolith-derived ages, and energy investment towards reproduction and body condition was quantified using the gonado-somatic
index and Fulton’s condition index. Body condition was higher for all species in shallow
waters than MCEs; however, variability in reproductive investment between shallow and
deep populations differed between species. For all species, fishes from shallow waters
reached larger asymptotic lengths than their conspecifics. This ongoing study addresses
the life history of coral reef fish, a key component of both shallow and mesophotic reef
communities, while providing structure for the development of conservation and fisheries management tools in understudied mesophotic environments.


BASELINES AND DRIVERS OF CORAL DISEASE IN THE WORLD’S OLDEST
MARINE PARK (Abstract ID: 28997)
Disease prevalence within a population or community provides an important indicator
of ecosystem health; however, its efficacy as an indicator depends on knowledge
of baseline levels of disease typical of healthy communities. Here we use Bayesian
hierarchical modelling to analyze a 12-year dataset of coral disease prevalence at 42
sites spanning cross-shelf gradients in terrigenous and human influences along 1200 km
of the Great Barrier Reef (GBR). Analyses of satellite-derived sea surface temperatures,
water quality metrics and wave heights indicate that overall, thermal and water quality
stress was relatively mild at study sites from 2004-2015, but with localized cyclone
waves. This long-term dataset of coral disease prevalence within a 45-year-old Marine
Park provides a unique opportunity to identify baseline levels of disease that characterize
comparatively healthy coral reef communities in the absence of extreme environmental
stress events. Using median expected prevalence values as baselines, the 95th percentile
of posteriors to denote unlikely levels, and the 95th percentile of the data to denote


ENVIRONMENTAL DRIVERS OF ACCLIMATIZATION: EFFECTS OF GRADUAL
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION IN REEF CORALS (Abstract ID: 29955)
Both bleaching severity and recovery conditions affect the reassembly of algal symbiont
communities during recovery, and incremental changes in community composition can
result in increased coral thermotolerance. We investigated how symbiont community
composition and coral bleaching thresholds were affected by repeated, short-term
thermal stress, both with and without gradual warming. We tested the hypotheses that
373

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Larger benthic foraminifera contribute largely to the carbonate reef budget and are great
tools in biostratigraphy. During the last decades they also got importance as indicator
species for ecological monitoring. Even before their advancement as bioindicators,
laboratory experiments have been conducted to investigate their biology, ecology and
reproduction. While recent studies have focused on the effects of single ecological
parameters mostly in short term culture experiments (few days to some weeks), the majority of results still shows growth abnormalities and truncated lifespans even in control
groups, indicating some imperfections in the culturing systems, which hardly represent
open water conditions. Therefore, to fully understand growth and life span of different
species and to improve their use in various fields, long term cultivations attempts must
be conducted trying to get the perfect equilibrium between cells and environment. This
study presents theoretical growth models of Operculina complanata based on a 15 month
cultivation experiment with 186 specimens and compares them to first results of the
equally long Natural Laboratory Approach both conducted at Sesoko station (Okinawa,
Japan). Culturing parameters such as temperature, light intensities, salinity and pH and
light-dark duration were continuously adapted according to the measurements in the
field. The average cell life time in culture was 77days, 13 Individuals lived more than 200
days, 3 reproduced asexually and one sexually, 14% of the individuals were lost and 22%
died within the first month.

episodic temperature stress results in stepwise increases in the abundance of thermotolerant symbionts and that this process is accelerated under gradually warming recovery
temperatures. Replicate cores from three colonies of the Caribbean coral Montastraea
cavernosa were distributed randomly into treatments in a crossed factorial design, experiencing either constant temperature (26oC) or gradual warming (1oC every 6 weeks),
and either short-term thermal stress (32oC, target ~25% symbiont community loss) or
no bleaching. Symbiont community function was tracked using chlorophyll fluorometry,
and tissue samples taken periodically were analyzed using actin-based qPCR assays to
determine symbiont community composition. All cores were subjected to a final bleaching stress at 32oC to assess thermotolerance. This experiment will elucidate how gradual
warming and punctuated bleaching stress affect symbiont community composition and
drive changes in coral thermotolerance, and has implications for the response of reef
corals to real-world warming scenarios.

PRIORITIZING SUITABLE CORAL RESTORATION SITES THROUGH ASSESSMENT
OF EXISTING CORAL MONITORING DATA (Abstract ID: 28793 | Poster ID: 535)


In the face of large scale coral reef decline, restoration efforts are increasing throughout
the Florida Reef Tract. The general focus of these efforts is restoring Acropora cervicornis populations. Currently, there is little to no spatially explicit information regarding
site prioritization for coral restoration efforts in Florida, where most restoration sites are
selected using expert opinion alone. This study is the first step towards using spatially
explicit information to guide restoration site selection in Florida. A species distribution modeling approach was taken to spatially prioritize restoration efforts along the
Florida Reef Tract. A series of non-parametric species distribution models (SDMs)
SDMs were combined with other spatial data in the conservation software “Zonation”
to prioritize restoration sites based on connectivity, species interactions, and health. The
results of this work is an interactive tool that can be adjusted to support the unique goals
of individual restoration projects.

FISHING ENDANGERS THE TROPHIC STRUCTURE OF THE CORAL AND
SHARK DOMINATED SYSTEM OF THE WOLF AND DARWIN ISLETS (GALAPAGOS): INSIGHTS FROM MODEL SIMULATION (Abstract ID: 27815)
The Galapagos archipelago is known for its great diversity in marine species distributed
over distinct biogeographic regions. We hypothesized that these regions not only differ
in species and/or their relative abundances, but also in overall biomass and resource
productivity with implications for fisheries management and conservation. We thus
modeled and compared the trophic structure of the south western Bolivar Channel (BC)
upwelling system and the coral dominated northern system of the Darwin and Wolf
(DW) islets using the Ecopath with Ecosim approach. Results indicate that the BC very
much resembles classical upwelling systems off the coast of Peru with high primary
production, low level of maturity, high biomass at lower trophic levels, high energy flow,
and sea lions as dominating top predators. The coral reef dominated system (DW), to
the contrary, showed a more complex food web structure, a higher degree of system maturity and a concentration of fish biomass in large predators (55%) that were identified
as keystone species largely controlling intermediate predators. By using the reference
models of both systems to explore the effect of increased fishing pressure, a negative impact was pronounced in the coral DW system, where the increased removal by herbivore
controlling fish, would eventually lead to an alternative system state with sea urchins
dominating the benthic biomass. We argue that an increase in fishing pressure in the
presently still semi-pristine coral and shark dominated northern area of the archipelago
(DW), would easily lead to loss of one of the most unique ecosystems of Galapagos and
propose strong conservation enforcement for the DW region.


ASYMMETRIC, LARGE SCALE COMMUNITY RESPONSES TO CLIMATE OSCILLATIONS IN GALAPAGOS SUBTIDAL ECOSYSTEMS (Abstract ID: 29048)
Climate events such as El Nino Southern Oscillations (ENSOs) can drive ecosystems
to a tipping point as thresholds are exceeded and a sudden transition to a different state
(regime) occurs. We monitored benthic communities and oceanography in Galapagos
rocky subtidal ecosystems at 12 sites for 14 to 17 years to test the hypothesis that ENSO’s create non-linear effects leading to a regime change. Extensive bleaching of massive (Porites, Pavona) and branching (Pocilloporid) corals occurred during the La Nina
phase of the 2006-2008 ENSO and again, during the 2010 to 2011 La Nina in response
to unusually large temperature variability (30.0 -14.0 degrees C). Surprisingly, large
increases in barnacle (Megabalanus) abundance coincided with coral bleaching during
both La Ninas, suggesting higher barnacle recruitment during these productive periods.
The asymmetric yin yang of ENSO effects was apparent in the negative impacts on corals via bleaching but positive, bottom-up effects on benthic food webs dependent on the
large barnacles. Barnacle abundance on rock walls attained maximum abundances of
60 to 80 % cover at some sites in recent years concomitant with a greater proportion of
corals overgrown by barnacles, suggesting a shift to a regime characterized by declining
coral populations and increasing barnacles and their predators. Community responses of
the most recent 2016 ENSO will be analyzed in the context of these hypotheses.


VULNERABILITY OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF TO GLOBAL AND LOCAL
PRESSURES: IMPLICATIONS FOR EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT AND POLICY
DECISIONS IN A WARMING OCEAN (Abstract ID: 29087)
The Great Barrier Reef (GBR) has lost half of its coral cover during the past thirty years,
attributed predominantly to storms, crown-of-thorns starfish (COTS) and, to a lesser
extent, bleaching. Two questions at the core of GBR management plans are: how vulnerable and resilient will the GBR be to future environmental scenarios, and what will the
relative importance be of different local or global disturbances? To answer these questions we use a spatially explicit model of coral cover dynamics (mortality and growth)
a series of 8 scenarios representing combinations of climate change (based on three
AR5 global circulation models) and local stressors, we analyse spatial and temporal
trends and uncertainties associated with future impacts. Our results demonstrate that
coral resilience will decline in pace with climate change under all three RCPs. Local and
regional management actions (land-use management, COTS control, spatial planning)
can compensate for this resilience loss on some reefs in the near-term (10 – 20 years),
but by 2050 these actions can no longer mitigate the loss imposed by climate change.
The implications of these results for management and policy decision problems are
discussed, particularly the need to better acknowledge and account for the limits of local
scale action when dealing with the global problem of climate change.


EVALUATING THE QUALITY OF A LONG TERM CULTIVATION EXPERIMENT OF
OPERCULINA COMPLANATA BY COMPARISON WITH THE NATURAL LABORATORY APPROACH (Abstract ID: 28635 | Poster ID: 290)

374

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


EVIDENCE OF REPRODUCTIVE PLASTICITY OF PORITES ASTREOIDES
ACROSS A DEPTH GRADIENT IN BERMUDA (Abstract ID: 28378 | Poster ID: 183)
Mesophotic coral reef ecosystems (MCEs) extend to the bottom of the photic zone and
are relatively sheltered from anthropogenic and natural disturbances resulting in low
reef degradation compared to shallow reef counterparts. MCEs are hypothesized to
serve as a refuge for shallow reefs, where larvae may aid the re-population of previously
disturbed shallow habitats. This study determines whether upper mesophotic Porites
astreoides can function as a reproductive refuge for shallow reef environments by (1)
comparing patterns in lunar periodicity, fecundity, and differences in larval sizes between
10 m and 30 m colonies, and (2) testing whether there is a significant difference between
larval settlement success in laboratory settings in July and August 2015. Shallow colonies released more larvae than upper mesophotic colonies in July, while the opposite
pattern was observed in August. In August, the shallow colonies released significantly
larger larvae than the upper mesophotic colonies, however this did not hinder metamorphosis as larval settlement rates did not differ with parental depth. These results indicate
reproductive refuge for shallow water environments.

HAWAIIAN POCCILOPORA DAMICORNIS BABIES LEAD THE WAY TO REEF
RESTORATION (Abstract ID: 28109 | Poster ID: 484)
Innovative techniques for restoring coral reefs have been a continuous conversation
among scientists, politicians, and government officials for decades. The ability to develop
and implement coral transplantation techniques without harvesting existing reef corals
can maintain a reef’s ecological value. Monthly collection of planula from colonies of
Hawaiian Pocillopora damicornis have been successfully maintained, and settled, and
the resulting colonies used as source material for mitigation projects. Frequent asexual
planulation (versus sexual propagation) provides an abundant supply of coral to be used
the way for other restorative corals by providing further insight for successful transplantation, artificial substrate preferences, re-aggregation of identical genotypes, and threshold
tolerances to anthropogenic stressors and climate change. Replicate experiments in large
quantities can be used to evaluate reef restoration trade offs such as the cost required to
transplant corals onto a reef versus the effort to transplant individual colonies. This plentiful resource holds the potential of becoming the new “lab rat” for reef experimentation
while at the same time providing critical source material for reef restoration.


A CATASTROPHIC CORAL DISEASE OUTBREAK IN HONG KONG THAT MAY BE
ASSOCIATED WITH HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS (Abstract ID: 29483)


A rare massive outbreak of coral disease took place in March 2015 in Tolo Harbour
and Channel, a eutrophied semi-enclosed embayment in northeastern Hong Kong. The
disease was first noticed by abnormal extensive protrusion of mesenterial filaments or
tentacles from affected coral colony surfaces. Rapid tissue loss quickly followed, with a
pattern closely resembled white syndrome. In tissues of diseased lesions, ciliates were
observed. Field survey registered a loss of 20.6-51.4% in total coral cover in five locations, three of which were within marine protected areas. Coral communities of closer
proximity to water discharge in inner Tolo Harbour were more impacted. Platygyra spp.,
the locally dominant corals, suffered the highest morality when compared to Acropora
spp., with the latter being generally shown to be more vulnerable to stresses and diseases.
Experimentally, healthy coral tissue could be induced to exhibit lesion by exposing to
water previously used to incubate diseased corals. Ciliates were always present in the
coral lesion even the water was filtrated and autoclaved. Presence of toxin in the water
was therefore the likely cause of lesion and the source of this toxin could have been the
harmful algal blooms of Heterocapsa circularisquama and Noctiluca scintillans that broke
out a bit earlier. The latter bloom attended the highest density (21500 cells/ml) ever
recorded since monitoring started in 1977. There could therefore be a close association
between eutrophication, algal bloom and coral diseases. Project supported by RGC GRF
460013.

CORAL ISOSCAPES REVEAL VARIED NITROGEN SOURCES AND DYNAMICS IN
HONG KONG’S COASTAL ENVIRONMENT (Abstract ID: 29155 | Poster ID: 92)
Hong Kong’s marine ecosystem health is under threat due to large inputs of dissolved
inorganic nitrogen (DIN) from various sources. We used stable isotope analysis to trace
major DIN source(s) affecting corals and examined their spatial and temporal variations
in coastal environments. We collected corals along coastlines in a wet and dry season
and analyzed the δ15N signals of their Symbiodinium (δ15Ns). Spatially, the mean δ15Ns
value was significantly lower in the Southern zone–SHK (5.6±1.5‰) than Northeastern
zones–PS (8.0±1.1‰) and MB (8.8±1.3‰) in the wet season. In the dry season, there
was no significant difference in the mean δ15Ns values among zones. When compared
between seasons, the mean δ15Ns value in SHK in the dry season (6.9±0.7‰) was
significantly higher than the wet season. The spatial and seasonal differences in the δ15Ns
values highlighted the influence of the Pearl River (PR), which supplies Hong Kong with
a high concentration of 14N compared to N derived from oceanic water. The dominance
of N from PR could contribute to the low δ15Ns values in SHK in the wet season as it is in
than wet season, can be explained by the decreasing influence of PR as the dry season
accounts for ~20% of the annual discharge. These data suggested PR has a major influence to the DIN dynamics and its significance is subject to spatial and seasonal changes.



EFFECT OF COMPETITION ON GROWTH AND FITNESS OFSYMBIODINIUM
POPULATIONS IN CULTURE (Abstract ID: 29175)

LINKING LAND AND SEA THROUGH AN ECOLOGICAL-ECONOMIC RECREATION MODEL (Abstract ID: 30134 | Poster ID: 587)

According to the resource-ratio hypothesis, autotrophs with a lower minimum nutrient
requirement will tend to dominate, as they further reduce nutrient availability to competitors, thus leading to dominance via competitive exclusion. With the use of bioreactors,
minimum nitrogen and light requirements for Symbiodinium can be quantified and used
to predict competitive outcomes among clades that co-occur in host corals. However,
competitive outcomes are likely influenced by physical factors such as temperature
and light, which can impact metabolic rates. Thus, a species may only be a superior
competitor for limiting nutrients within its thermal or irradiance optima. We show that
temperature drives different competitive outcomes in mixed cultures of Symbiodinium
ratio = 0.00), than at 26˚C (0.02) after 33 days of competition. In co-dominant populations, a slightly reduced photosynthetic efficiency (YII=0.376) was observed in comparison to pure cultures (YII=0.399). We hypothesis that reduced YII is a consequence of
resources being allocated to competition and fewer to beneficial metabolic traits. The
cost of hosting competing Symbiodiniumpopulations might explain the rarity of mixed
Symbiodinium populations in situ.

Coastal and marine systems provide key ecosystem goods and services that support
human well-being. Despite their importance for Hawaii’s economy, many of these
services are declining due to land-based stressors, such as nutrient runoff, pollution,
and sedimentation. These stressors are expected to worsen with increasing climate
change and development, resulting in ecological, cultural, and economic benefits loss.
To support an integrated land-sea approach to management and planning in a priority
watershed in West Maui, we are building a Bayesian network-based recreation model
to link a sedimentation model and land-based sources of pollution with the social and
ecological factors that influence recreationists’ preferences for snorkeling sites. Employing a discrete choice experiment (DCE), we evaluated preferences and willingness to pay
for six coastal site attributes. We are linking non-market economic values with ecological
attributes to assess ecological, economic, and cultural gains and losses under different
climate change and management scenarios. Preliminary DCE results suggest that
recreationists positively value benefits in terms of increased biodiversity and recreation
opportunities, as well as reductions in pollution and health risk. Our results are expected
to inform strategic planning for integrated ridge to reef management that strengthens
both socioeconomic and ecosystem health.


375

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

com

simulated in a westward direction. Significant complexity in the surface flows transporting larvae mean that generalised upper-ocean circulation patterns are poor descriptors
of inter-regional connectivity, complicating assessments of how climate change will
impact coral gene flow Pacific-wide. We discuss efforts to incorporate the effects of temperature on larval development in the biophysical model in order to make more accurate
projections of future dispersal.

APPLYING SOCIAL SCIENCE TO UNDERSTAND THE WELL-BEING OF REEFDEPENDENT COMMUNITIES IN MICRONESIA (Abstract ID: 28110)
The importance of social science for generating management-relevant information
about the uses and impacts of human activities on coral reef and other coastal resources is now recognized. In recent years, the use of social scientific methods has been
expanded to include research that examines how people benefit from natural resource
management and conservation intervention, a key objective that increasingly has been
adopted by conservation organizations and coastal resource management agencies
across all geographical areas. Social scientific methods are being employed to help develop indicators to better understand linkages among changes in biological and physical
conditions, ecosystem services, and human well-being. This presentation examines efforts and activities in Micronesia related to the use of social science identifying the most
important human well-being indicators for the region, as well as the opportunities and
challenges involved in implementing social scientific research. The presentation will also
highlight in particular the NOAA Habitat Blueprint focus area in Guam and how social
science is being employed in designing socio-ecological research that examines impacts
of sedimentation on reefs as critical habitats and on fisheries as a means of livelihood
and cultural heritage.

Reproductive failure in Caribbean Acropora has been identified as a critical factor in their
Endangered Species Act (ESA) listing and in preventing the species’ recovery. Previous
work on Acropora palmata (elkhorn coral) reproductive condition indicates that visually
intact and ‘apparently healthy’ colonies can in fact carry mild to severe reproductive
effort in two Florida reefs and two St. Croix reefs to 100% at one St. John, USVI reef.
populations that are reproductively viable, indicating healthy ‘resilient’ populations, and
those that are impacted. This work has identified key locations where further management actions are needed to promote species recovery and provides the first step in an
epidemiological approach to understanding drivers of decline in certain populations, as
well as populations warranting heightened protection (resilient populations).


BIOEROSION BY THE SEA URCHINS ON CORALS IN THAILAND (Abstract ID:
30031 | Poster ID: 84)
Sea urchin is one of the most abundant bioeroders in coral reefs in Thailand. In this
study, the bioerosion on a staghorn coral Acropora millepora (Ehrenberg, 1834) by the
sea urchin Diadema setosum (Leske, 1778) was investigated. Both field surveys and
experiments were conducted. From the field surveys at Chon Buri Province in the upper
Gulf of Thailand, the highest abundance of sea urchins was approximately 11 individuals
m-2. The results from the stomach contents showed that there were significant amounts
of calcium carbonate found in the sea urchins’ stomachs. In addition, two experiments
were conducted to investigate the interaction between sea urchins and corals and the
interaction between sea urchin, corals, and algae Cladophora sp. The results of the
interaction experiment without algae showed that bioerosion rates of one sea urchin
were approximately 0.20 g day-1 and 1.59 cm-2 day-1 in term of CaCO3 and area
respectively, which were higher than that of with algae. There were also correlations
between the densities of sea urchins, sizes of sea urchins, and the bioerosion rates.
However, after the experiments, we found that most corals bioeroded by the sea urchins
can recover within 14 days.


MICROATOLLS AS INDICATORS OF SEA-LEVEL CHANGE ON REEFS (Abstract
ID: 28523)
A major outcome of the Great Barrier Reef expedition in 1973, and David Stoddart’s
research during it, focused on detecting changes in sea level. Together with Terry Scoffin,
he described living and fossil microatolls from the Great Barrier Reef and recognised
their significance as sea-level indicators. In the four decades since, changes in sea level
associated with global climate change have become a focus of considerable concern, particularly in relation to the small reef islands throughout reefal seas. Accurately surveyed
and dated Porites microatolls provide considerable insight into past water level changes,
especially where their elevations can be compared to living modern equivalents. These
long-lived massive corals, up to 9 metres in diameter, preserve a biologically-mediated
multi-decadal record of sea-level. The upper surface of fossil microatolls on a reef flat
generally lies in a narrow elevation range similar to that observed for their modern, living
counterparts. This paper examines the insights that Stoddart provided and assesses how
microatoll morphology is likely to respond to future sea-level changes.


EL NIÑO, SURFACE CIRCULATION AND CORAL LARVAL DISPERSAL ACROSS
THE WORLD’S GREATEST MARINE BARRIER (Abstract ID: 29457)


Over 5000 km separates the frequently disturbed coral reefs of the Eastern Tropical
Pacific (ETP) from western sources of population replenishment. However, the presence
of trans-Pacific corals in the ETP implies that some species have, at least historically,
breached this ‘East Pacific Barrier’ (EPB). It has been proposed that increased eastward
flow during El Niño facilitates cross-Pacific dispersal into the region. However, direct
evidence is lacking in corals. We present output from a biophysical dispersal model,
employing the Connectivity Modelling System (CMS), driven by 15 years (1997-2011)
of high resolution oceanographic data. The model is parameterised to represent the
positively buoyant larvae of a generic broadcast spawning coral with high dispersal potential. No eastward cross-Pacific connections occurred over the modelled period, which
encompasses a range of climatic variability, including the extreme 1997-98 El Niño. We
infer that ETP populations decimated by this event have therefore likely recovered from
local sources. Instead, rare connections between eastern and central Pacific reefs were

ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS LIMITING FERTILISATION AND LARVAL SUCCESS
IN CORALS (Abstract ID: 29181 | Poster ID: 530)
Early life history stages of reef-building corals, specifically fertilisation and larval survival,
are susceptible to changes in the chemical and physical properties of seawater. Quantifying how changes in water quality affects these stages is therefore important for understanding and predicting population establishment in novel or changing environments.
A review of the literature identified that levels of salinity, temperature, pH, suspended
sediment, nutrients, and heavy metals affect coral early life history stages. Using published experimental data, this study quantified the influence of these seawater properties
376

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

will illustrate approaches to dealing with risk to marine assets revealing dimensions of
resource risk exposure, risk reduction and future liabilities. Our understanding of the
role of biodiversity; reef system robustness; recoverability; habitat uniqueness; species
life cycles in the sustainability of reef services will be reviewed and reveals fundamental
gaps in knowledge. The global efforts being made to place $ values on the world’s natural capital and tropical ecosystem life support services will be summarised. A pioneering
approach to environmental due diligence of investments, eco risk assessments will be
presented. Insights will be given on the latest techniques for mapping environmental
resources and services in integrated GIS systems on the web, which will provide a “reef
ecosystem health thermometer” making key services visible to stakeholders.

on coral fertilisation and larval survivorship probabilities. Fertilisation success was highly
sensitive to salinity, copper, phosphorous and suspended sediment. Larval survivorship
was sensitive to copper, lead and temperature. A combined model was developed, to
estimate the joint probability of survival through fertilisation and larval survivorship.
This model was able to determine the likelihood of larvae surviving through each stage
of development to settlement competency, as well as incorporating real life data from
Sydney and Lizard Island in Australia. This combined model could therefore be used to
recommend targets for water quality in coastal waterways as well as aid in predicting the
potential for species to expand their geographical range in response to climate change.


PRELIMINARY MEASUREMENTS OF CORAL COMMUNITY LIGHT-USE EFFICIENCY IN RESPONSE TO VARIABLE ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS (Abstract
ID: 28716)

A NEXT-GENERATION APPROACH TO SPECIES DELIMITATION IN THE SPECIOSE OCTOCORAL GENUS, SINULARIA (Abstract ID: 28271)

Primary production is arguably the most important ecological function of corals.
Primary production is strongly driven by ambient light levels, confounding interpretation
of day-scale productivity measurements. Light-use efficiency (LUE) normalizes primary
production by removing the light-engendered variability. Our objective was to determine
how environmental conditions affect the LUE of a coral community. We placed a community ofPorites astreoides inside a flume mesocosm, where we controlled irradiance and
flow speed during four trials: (1) control, (2) elevated temperature, (3) elevated nutrients,
and (4) elevated CO2. During each trial, we measured daily gross primary production (P)
and daily absorbed photosynthetically available radiation (APAR), then calculated LUE
elevated temperature or CO2, but LUE did decrease significantly under elevated nutrient
conditions. Though it was not explicitly manipulated, there was a statistically significant
negative correlation between LUE and salinity, which increased as a by-product of
the nutrient treatment methodology. Further research is required to more definitively
characterize the effects of larger changes in each of the environmental parameters, but
these preliminary data demonstrate the potential utility of applying LUE to evaluate an
important aspect of reef ecosystem function.

Sinularia is a speciose clade (~180 described species) of octocorals that dominates
primary substrate in shallow coral reef communities throughout the Indo-Pacific.
Like other zooxanthellate corals, Sinularia is highly susceptible to bleaching, and mass
mortality events have been recorded throughout its range. Attempts to better understand
the ecology of Sinularia-dominated communities are hindered by the difficulty of
delineating species. Molecular markers and associated morphological synapomorphies
divide the genus into five major clades, but within clades a marked lack of congruence
between morphological and molecular characters leads to conflicting evidence for
species boundaries. To date it is not clear if this conflict is due to the relative invariability
of the mitochondrial markers typically used for species discrimination or to a lack of
understanding of the range of intraspecific morphological variability in the genus. To
address this issue, we used a RADseq next-generation sequencing approach to delineate
species boundaries among 14 putative morphospecies in which molecular identity is often in conflict with morphology. The majority of the specimens analyzed were collected
from a single site in the South China Sea (Dongsha Atoll) where a mixed assemblage of
Sinularia species covers >80% of the shallow forereef. Delineation of species based on
the RADseq data has allowed us to assess the reliability of single-locus mt haplotypes
for species discrimination in Sinularia, and to identify genetic clades that exhibit high
levels of morphological variability.


LOOKING THROUGH A MICROSCOPE BRIGHTLY! TISSUE CHANGES SHED
LIGHT INTO PATHOGENESIS OF DISEASE AND ECOLOGICAL PROCESSES IN


POPULATION GENETICS OF HUMPHEAD WRASSE (CHEILINUS UNDULATUS)
IN ANAMBAS ISLANDS, INDONESIA BASED ON D-LOOP MITOCHONDRIAL
DNA (Abstract ID: 28803)

Understanding what drives coral reef health and kills animals associated with coral
reefs will be critical to maintaining healthy reefs. By revealing morphologic changes
at the cellular level such as inflammation or presence of microorganisms, histology
has provided important insights into health of various organisms associated with coral
reefs in the Pacific. For instance, we now know that the herpesvirus associated with
fibropapillomatosis, a tumor disease affecting sea turtles globally, is shed mainly in small
tumors, and that only a few affected turtles (superspreaders) are likely responsible for
a majority of disease transmission. Skin lesions in surgeonfish, thought to be a normal
color variant, have turned out to be pigment cell tumors. A die-off of collector urchins
on Oahu was likely associated with viral-like particles infecting inflammatory cells. Finally, histology is beginning to explain various phenomena in coral diseases such as dark
spots (overgrowth of fungi), tissue loss (associated with parasitic corals, ciliates, fungi,
algae, and cyanobacteria), and growth anomalies. Microscopy might even prove useful
in explaining ecological patterns. We have found that dominant Porites, Acropora, and
Pocillopora have a high prevalence of tissue-associated bacterial symbionts that could
provide competitive advantages and explain their dominance on reefs. Microscopic
morphology of corals might also even aid coral taxonomy by revealing tissue structures
unique to certain species. Many new discoveries await those willing to peer through the
looking glass.

Overfishing is the main threat of coral reef biodiversity on the planet. One of the threatened species is the humphead wrasse (Cheilinus undulatus) which also known as the
napoleon wrasse, is mainly found on coral reefs in the Indo-Pacific region. Listed as an
‘endangered’ species on the IUCN Red List, the major threat to this species is live reef
food fish trading (LRFFT) exports to Hong Kong and South China. Anambas, Indonesia
has long been a center of export for humphead wrasse and groupers. This trade is
primarily composed of wild-caught adult individuals, but over time stocks have become
severely overfished and adults in the wild have become nearly impossible to find.
relationships of adults from captivity with juveniles in the wild through a portion of the
were collected from captivity in Air Sena and Tanjung Patinting and 50 samples of the
juveniles were collected from Air Asuk and Batu Belah. Our results show that among 19
haplotypes, haplotype 1 was predominantly found in Air Asuk and Batu Belah. Thus, the
remaining juveniles were from haplotypes of the adults from captivity other than in Air
Sena and Tanjung Patinting. This haplotype network will provide a better understanding
of whether there is a natural semi-closed aquaculture system in Anambas and further for
the conservation management of humphead wrasse, particularly in that region.


SPONGE DIVERSITY ON CORAL REEFS: PHYLOGENETIC SIGNAL IN RESPONSES TO PROCESSES THAT DRIVE DIVERSITY PATTERNS (Abstract ID: 30071)

DEALING WITH CORAL REEFS RISK AND DECISION MAKING IN THE FACE OF
CLIMATE CHANGE AND DEVELOPMENT NEEDS (Abstract ID: 29465)

Sponges do not conform with geographic-scale species diversity patterns illustrated
by corals and other coral reef organisms: region-wide sponge species diversity is
similar among ocean basins, and local diversity is revealed to be similar among locales
whenever a variety of sites are sampled. Lack of conformity may reflect the broad range
of growth forms, internal morphologies, propagative strategies, chemical characteristics, skeletal properties, and symbiont associations displayed by members of the at
least 20 sponge orders that inhabit coral reefs; and the consequently broad range of
ecological requirements and vulnerabilities of sponge species. We have been evaluating
processes driving diversity patterns by experimental additions of species to sites from

New dimensions of environmental resource value and loss will increasingly become a
key feature on the government balance sheet in coral reef regions. Forecasting expected
losses of critical environmental functions provided by reefs is setting new challenges for
scientists. International investors wrestle with the dollar value of risks of frontier tropical
ecosystems which affect stakeholder confidence. Efforts to develop “state of the art”
techniques to quantify coral reef ecosystem services will be presented plus a critique of
how these support decision making. Advances in GIS and satellite imagery illustrate the
future opportunities to measure regional ecosystem changes. A series of case histories

377

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

which they were absent, and by monitoring sites through time in sufficient detail that
diversity changes can be confidently ascribed to particular abiotic or biotic events. The
latter entails time-series volume measurements of every sponge of every species in
permanent plots. During the last 30 years, our long-term census plots at four Caribbean
sites have experienced temperature anomalies, dense phytoplankton blooms, disease,
changes in predator populations, and storms; resulting in data on how over 80 species
are influenced by these factors. Simple tallies of number of species do not tell the
important stories about sponge diversity. Analyses of phylogenetic signal in responses
to environmental challenges reveal a troubling coincidence of beneficial functional roles
played on coral reefs and diversity losses.

SWITCH FROM AUTOTROPHY TO MIXOTROPHY IN SYMBIODINIUM: GLUCOSE MODULATION OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND SYMBIOSIS (Abstract ID:
29029)


The mutualistic symbiosis between Symbiodinium and its cnidarian hosts provides the
metabolic foundation for biodiverse coral-reef ecosystems, but many details of nutrient
exchange between host and alga remain unknown. Here we show that when cultured in
the presence of glucose in the light (10 µE) (mixotrophic growth), clonal Symbiodinium
strain SSB01 loses pigmentation and photosynthetic activity, whereas little loss of
pigmentation occurs during growth on glucose in the dark. Mixotrophic cells also lose
thylakoid membranes, accumulate lipids, alter their cell surface, and show little ability
to infect either larval or aposymbiotic adult Aiptasia (anemone) hosts (suggesting that
algal photosynthesis may be important for uptake or retention by the host). Despite
these changes, the alga exhibits rapid growth on glucose in either the light or dark.
When bleached cells are returned to medium without glucose, they regain pigmentation,
photosynthetic activity, photoautotrophic growth and the ability to infect the host. To
elucidate how glucose modulates SSB01 physiology, we used RNA-seq and RT-qPCR to
characterize changes in global gene expression during both bleaching and recovery. We
found that levels of transcripts for proteins associated with photosynthesis, carbohydrate
metabolism, and cell adhesion declined in glucose-bleached cells, suggesting that modulation of transcript abundance upon addition of glucose to photoautotophically-grown
cultures reflects certain physiology changes that allow the transition from a photoautotrophic to a mixotrophic life-style.

THE OUR FLORIDA REEFS COMMUNITY PLANNING PROCESS: COLLABORATIVE MANAGEMENT ACTION DESIGN TO INFORM THE CONSERVATION OF
SOUTHEAST FLORIDA’S CORAL REEF ECOSYSTEM (Abstract ID: 28859)
The Our Florida Reefs Community Planning Process is an unprecedented opportunity
for community engagement in marine resource management in the State of Florida
that has brought together local residents, reef users, business owners, visitors and the
broader public in southeast Florida to identify actions that should be taken to strengthen
coral reef conservation and management in the region. This area, which is inhabited by
more than 6 million residents with an additional 30 million tourists visiting each year, lies
adjacent to the northern third of the Florida Reef Tract. Our Florida Reefs (OFR) was
designed to increase public involvement in the management of southeast Florida’s coral
reef ecosystems by facilitating a collaborative process with community members to
develop recommendations that will become part of a comprehensive management strategy to ensure healthy coral reefs in the future. Community Working Groups consisting of
local residents, reef users, business owners, scientists, and representatives from NGOs
and local, state, and federal agencies worked together to developed recommended
management actions through a 2 year collaborative planning process. The outcomes of
OFR will provide the State of Florida with a strategic policy framework for the integrated
management of coral resources along its southeast coast. Planning and implementation
of OFR is a partnership between Florida Department of Environmental Protection and
NOAA’s Coral Reef Conservation Program.


WAITING FOR RECRUITMENT: RESILIENCE WITHOUT RECOVERY IN THE
LAKSHADWEEP ARCHIPELAGO (Abstract ID: 28632)


Determining the resilience of reefs to increasingly severe climatic events will be critical for their effective management. There is growing evidence that resilient reefs are
characterized by high levels of herbivory–essential for mediating algal growth–and the
availability of stable structure for new coral settlement. After a coral mass mortality in
2010, we monitored 9 shallow reefs in the Lakshadweep to determine if our assessment
of their resilience capacity was reflected in recovery five years later. Although most reefs
showed high herbivory rates and had suitable recruit settlement structures, recovery
was slow across the archipelago. From 2012-2015 coral cover in permanent quadrats
increased by a maximum of 1.5% per year. This contrasts with recovery trajectories after
the 1998 ENSO mass mortality, where coral cover increased by 7% annually at these
reefs, driven primarily by species of Acropora. In contrast, post-2010, coral juveniles
were nearly three times less abundant at these reefs. Recovery, where observed, was
driven by a single species (Pocillopora verrucosa). This compositional shift can have
important consequences for the structural complexity and community assembly in these
reefs. Our results suggest that despite having several factors necessary to guarantee
resilience, the absence of banner years of coral recruitment post-disturbance may
seriously limit current reef recovery trajectories across the Lakshadweep Archipelago.
Identifying and protecting potential sources of coral larvae will be critical to translate this
high resilience into quick recovery.

ECOLOGICAL AND BIOGEOCHEMICAL IMPACTS OF INTERNAL WAVES ON
MESOPHOTIC CORAL ECOSYSTEMS: TESTING EDDY CORRELATION AND
ISOTOPE APPROACHES, IRIOMOTE, JAPAN (Abstract ID: 28489)
While mesophotic coral ecosystems (MCE) may be protected or damped from disturbances impacting shallower reefs insufficient information is available on the environmental conditions supporting these ‘deep water refugia’. Nutrient inputs and recycling
have rarely been quantified over MCE but may differ fundamentally to that of shallow
counterparts due to the reduction in light and increasing reliance on oceanic nutrients,
leading to increased heterotrophy over autotrophy at species and ecosystem levels and
stronger links to oceanic processes. For instance, due to the depth of MCE relative to
typical water column density stratification, internal waves may be a highly significant
process depending on community aspect and exposure. Preliminary observations of
MCE along a continuum of oceanic exposure in Funauki Bay, Iriomote, Japan indicate
that ocean-exposed MCE are subject to semi-diurnal temperature oscillations of up to
4 C during summer (range 23 – 29 deg C), while inner MCE occur shallower in more
turbid but stable environments. Oceanic exposure along the bay may determine both the
distribution and function of spatially extensive, but relatively homogenous, communities
dominated by Leptoseris sp. or Acropora ? horrida. Combining bulk and compound-specific stable isotope analyses, depth-specific radioisotope markers such as radiocarbon,
and eddy correlation experiments in these habitat promises a useful approach for elucidating the functional importance of internal waves in the development and persistence
of MCE at local to regional scales.


GAPS BETWEEN FUTURE DISTRIBUTION OF CORALS AND MARINE USE/
After the adoption of the Aichi Target 2010, protected areas are rapidly expanding in
Japan. It is also true in coastal areas such as the Pacific side of the northern part of the
main island (Sanriku) and Southern islands in Okinawa. However, most of them did
not consider the effect of climate change to decide their conservation target. Here we
evaluated the potential distribution of the reef-forming coral species, such as Acropora

378

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

spicifera and Acropora solitaryensis, which compose coral communities around their
northern limits in the Pacific.. We projected future distribution of these species using
outputs of statistical models based on future sea surface temperature (SST) data derived
from climate models. We also collected data on the use of the coasts, including fisheries
right areas and areas with marine leisure activities the latter of which was represented by
the number of dive shops. The distributions of the coral species are highly constrained
by the lowest SST and would potentially expand to the north within 50 and 100 years.
of the coral reefs showed there were significant differences between the use of the corals for leisure activities and the distribution of the species even in the present situation.
Considering the future distribution, potential conflicts between the present fishery use
and coral expansion was suggested. We will discuss suitable configurations of proposed
marine protected areas considering these dynamics and conflicts under several different
conservation targets.

hr-1 though seawater in water column was oversaturated with respect to Mg-calcite. This
would be caused by Mg-calcite dissolution and bacterial sulfate reduction.

MARGINAL CORAL REEFS AND CORAL COMMUNITIES IN JAPAN (Abstract ID:
29388)
Japan covers a wide latitudinal range, stretching from subtropical to temperate areas.
Coral communities and reef morphologies show significant changes along the latitudinal
gradient, which provides baselines to understand coral reef development patterns
and to examine the effect of climate change on coral communities. 1) Unique feature:
The highest-latitude coral reefs in the world occur at Tsushima and Iki Islands (34˚N)
(Yamano et al., 2012, Geology). These coral reefs are established under extremely low
sea surface temperature (SST) and high turbidity setting. Thus defining the end of the
distributional range, the reefs serve as baselines for understanding coral reef distribution
along SST and turbidity gradients. 2) Historic change: A 80-year record of coral occurrence showed poleward range expansions of four species in response to SST warming
(Yamano et al., 2011, GRL). A monitoring program revealed winter SST tolerance of
each coral species, which enabled improved reconstruction of the past range expansions
based on inter-annual variation of sea surface temperatures (Takao et al., 2015, Coral
Reefs). 3) Future projection: It would require consideration of another important issue,
ocean acidification. Without consideration of coral adaptation and/or acclimation, in
the high CO2 emission scenario, coral habitats will be lost in the 2070s because of higher
SST in the south and ocean acidification in the north, whereas the lowered CO2 emission scenario allows coral survive around the southern part of Japan even in the 2090s.
This strongly suggests the importance of reducing CO2 emission for conservation of
corals (Yara et al., in press).


INTENSIVE CORAL REEF RESTORATION TECHNOLOGY BY APPLYING LARVAL
SUPPLY BASE (Abstract ID: 28505)


Since 2006, we have developed the useful and efficient technology on active coral reef
restoration as the project of Japanese Fisheries Agency at Okinotorishima, the southernmost isolated island of Japan. Firstly, coral mass-culture technology by using sexual
reproduction in aquarium was developed from 2006 to 2008 at Okinawa. As the result,
the highest survival rate in one year later reached up to 80%. Besides, the mass-cultured
juvenile corals grown on ceramic tiles were successfully transported from Okinawa
to Okinotorishima, 1,100km away, via a research vessel taking 64 hours. On the other
hand, we developed the artificial concrete block designed as a substrate for outplanting
juvenile corals and installed them to the unsuitable area for coral such as sandy gravel
bottom at Okinotorishima in 2009. Since 2010, field experiment has been carried out in
which the transported ceramic tiles with juvenile corals were outplanted on the blocks.
The highest survival rate of the coral in the artificial blocks in one year later marked
more than 80% in an appropriate experimental condition. The next challenge is to expand restoration scale utilizing larval dispersal ability. Therefore, we are trying to develop
of “the larval supply base”, functioning as not only nursery for juvenile corals but also
larval supply from maturity corals. It is estimated based on our basic test outcome that
100 square meters larval supply bases, stocking 9 mature colonies of the same species
per square meter, have a potential for supplying 100 larvae per square meter on 40ha in
Okinotorishima.

DAILY FLUORESCENT BAND RECORDED BEHIND BLACK BAND DISEASE
(Abstract ID: 28107 | Poster ID: 155)
Coral diseases are growing concern for coral reef conservation as well as predation by
starfish and bleaching due to warmer water. Black band disease (BBD) is a first coral
disease found in Caribbean Sea and has been spreading many coral reefs worldwide.
I found periodical green fluorescent bands as GFP on the surface of dead skeleton
after BBD infection. These bands match daily pattern, and are observed exclusively on
the light (or upper) side of BBD-affected corals. Fluorescent bands were obvious for
encrusting, branching and foliacious Montipora corals those are most susceptible corals
around Sesoko Island, Japan. Fluorescent bands are translucent, powdery, and some are
spot-like form close to polyp structure. Peak band was observed at 535nm when excited
at 410nm. Bands are stable in acidic/alkaline solution, in organic solvent, in sodium
hypochlorite solution, and still have fluorescence more than a year for dried specimen.
Progress rate of BBD was faster in upper (light) side during daytime. Bands are formed
during daytime through some chemical changes affected by bacterial activities under the


ACROPORA TENUIS LARVAE CAN EXPEL NON-ESSENTIALSYMBIODINIUM
STRAINS (Abstract ID: 28542 | Poster ID: 121)

DISSOLUTION OF CARBONATE SEDIMENT AT SEAGRASS MEADOW ESTIMATED BY TOTAL ALKALINITY FLUX AND PORE WATER PROFILES (Abstract
ID: 28915 | Poster ID: 242)

Acropora corals must acquire Symbiodinium from the surrounding environment during
early ontogeny. The genus Symbiodinium includes nine phylogenetically distinct groups
(clades A-I), and each clade includes numerous types. Recent field observations revealed
that naturally settledAcropora recruits typically harbor certain members of clades A and
D, despite the presence of other Symbiodinium in the nearby environment. In contrast,
Acropora larvae/juveniles can acquire a variety of Symbiodinium in the laboratory. Although this disparity between field and laboratory results might be attributed to Symbiodinium cell densities around the coral, it remains unclear how corals process accidentally
clade A strains (type A1 and type A3, which are often found within natural Acroporarecruits, and type A2 relative, which is never detected within corals) and then determined
the infection rate and density of infected cells within larvae. The infection rate and
density of cells infected with types A1 and A3 did not decrease even after the supply of
Symbiodinium cells was stopped. However, the infection rate and density of cells infected
with the type A2 relative declined from 83.3 ± 20.8 to 46.7 ± 5.8% and from 8.2 ± 3.3 to
4.9 ± 0.9 cells/indiv., respectively, within 7 days after removal of Symbiodinium. Even in
can expel non-essential Symbiodinium strains.

Ocean acidification decreases the pH of seawater and the saturation state of minerals,
and Eyre et al. (2014, Nature Climate Change) indicated that carbonate sediment dissolution could be more sensitive to ocean acidification than calcification by reef organisms.
Particularly in seagrass-carbonate sediment, it has been suggested that both abundant
labile organic matter and wide redox range would increase pCO2 in sediment, and total
alkalinity (TA) flux from sediment to water column caused by Mg-calcite dissolution
would also increase. Here, we measured sedimentary dissolved oxygen (DO) and
carbonate profiles in a seagrass area of Shiraho coral reef, Ishigaki Island, and TA flux
at the sediment-water interface was estimated under natural hydrodynamic conditions
using eddy covariance (EC). Almost half of the sediment was Mg-calcite derived from
foraminifera and its Mg content was 16.4 mol%. Analysis of the sedimentary DO and
Oxidation-Reduction Potential (ORP) profiles at night indicated that O2 was depleted
deeper than at least 4 mm and sulfate reduction could occur. While pore water TA and
dissolved inorganic carbon values increased with depth, pore water saturation state of
aragonite was constant at a value of ~ 2.3 during the entire nighttime. On the other hand,
the calculated nighttime TA flux from sediment to water column was 0.9–3.2 mmol m-2
379

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


variations. The integration of the time-series pCO2 data shows that the reef area is a
weak source of atmospheric CO2 at ~0.54 mol CO2 m-2 yr-1. Further analyses indicates that the seasonal variations of the surface seawater pCO2 in Luhuitou fringing reef
are mainly affected by seasonally-dependent biological metabolic processes (organic
process and inorganic process), and that the organic process play a more important role
than the inorganic process. Seasonal sea surface temperature (SST) variations and hydrodynamic processes may also have some influence on seawater pCO2 variation.

VARIATION OF KUROSHIO TRANSPORT DURING 1860-2007 AD INFERRED FROM
CORAL NITROGEN ISOTOPE SIGNATURE (Abstract ID: 29259 | Poster ID: 97)
The Kuroshio Current supports the tropical reef corals thriving in the temperate areas
along the Pacific coast of Japan. We reconstructed the variability of nitrate supply on
Kuroshio front due to the current transport over the past 151 years using coral skeletal
nitrogen isotopic composition (d15Ncoral). A 151-year d15Ncoral record is four times
the length of the observational record (1971-present) of Kuroshio transport and could
provide a direct comparison with global climate change, such as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) index and El-Niño (ENSO), through recent global warming. Coral cores
from Porites were collected from Tatsukushi Bay in 2008 on the Pacific coast of Japan,
which is located on the northern front of the Kuroshio Current. d15Ncoral was used as a
proxy to record the d15N of nitrate controlled by the upwelling of subtropical subsurface
water, and d15Ncoral was negatively correlated with observations of the Kuroshio
transport (R=-0.69, P<0.001) and the 2-year lagged PDO index (R=-0.63, P<0.005) from
1972 to 2007. The 151-year record of d15Ncoral suggested that the Kuroshio transport
varied in ~25 year cycle, and the amplitude became more stable and the volume was
intensified through the 20th century. The Kuroshio transport was intensified by the La
Niña state in the early 1900s and by the El-Niño-PDO state after the 1920s. Our results
suggested that the variation of Kuroshio transport is relevant to north pacific climate
through the 151 years and controls nitrate supply on the Kuroshio front.


THE GROWTH AND CALCIFICATION OF THE CORALLINE ALGA, AMPHIROA
The calcifying/coralline red algae play critical ecological roles including contributing significantly to primary productivity, enhancing critical structural strength and consolidating
reef through calcification, as well as being key to a range of invertebrate settlement and
metamorphosis processes in coral reef ecosystems. A new strain was isolated from the
South China Sea and its characteristics was investigated. By analyzing structural features
and 18s RNA, the strain was identified as Amphiroa sp. It contained biochemically precipitated calcium carbonate as skeletal material with high calcification rate. The growth
rate with 3-4 g m-2 d-1 was determined. Additionally, the effects of pH on physiological
performance of Amphiroa sp. was also investigated. The results revealed that growth
rate was negatively impacted, while the calcification rate was rarely affected by ocean
acidification.


THERMAL PERFORMANCE OF THE HIGH LATITUDE CORAL PORITES HERONENSIS: SIGNIFICANCE FOR ITS FUTURE DISTRIBUTION (Abstract ID: 28150 |
Poster ID: 312)
A northward shift of hermatypic corals distribution due to the increase in seawater temperature under climate change has been observed in Japan, with further shift predicted
in the future. The main factor limiting coral distribution is considered to be the lowest
annual seawater temperature. Therefore, it is important to study the physiological response to temperature change of corals living in the vicinity of the northern distribution
limit. The present study investigates the thermal performance of a marginal coral,Porites
heronensis. The corals were incubated under different temperature for 14 days and their
metabolims and physiological parameters were measured. The optimal temperature for
annual average SST observed in Nabeta bay. Critical lower temperature was 12°C with
obtained showed that the annual lowest SST in Nabeta bay, 12°C, could limit the growth
seawater temperature due to climate change could decrease bleaching occurrence
Nabeta bay. It could also allow a poleward shift of the northern limit of its distribution.
However, the annual maximum temperature in Nabeta Bay being 26°C, a future increase
of more than 3°C could lead to possible bleaching during summer even in such high
latitudes.

BACTERIAL AND EUKARYOTIC COMMUNITIES ASSOCIATED WITHPALYTHOA
TUBERCULOSA – DIVERSITY AND RELATION TO PALYTOXIN DISTRIBUTION
PATTERNS IN JAPAN (Abstract ID: 29177)
The function of coral-associated microorganisms have been broadly studied with relation to nutrient cycles, however, microbial diversity of other reef organisms and the roles
of secondary metabolites are still scarce. Palythoa tuberculosa (Anthozoa: Zoantharia) is
a common reef zoantharian, but lack of information on this species’ microbial diversity.
It also possesses a large non-peptide toxin, palytoxin (PTX). The origins of PTX and
its analogs have not yet been identified, but dinoflagellates and/or bacteria are putative
different seasons to provide baseline information of community composition. In addition, we measured PTX concentrations to investigate correlations between microbial
PTX content was checked in colony tissue. DNA was isolated from gastric cavity water
results showed the dominant bacteria was family Endozoicimonaceae at both locations.
levels are still in progress.



SEASONAL VARIATIONS OF SEAWATER PCO2 AND SEA-AIR CO2 FLUXES IN A
FRINGING CORAL REEF, NORTHERN SOUTH CHINA SEA (Abstract ID: 28112 |
Poster ID: 370)

ENDOLITHIC BACTERIAL COMMUNITIES AND POTENTIAL FUNCTIONS IN
THE CORAL ISOPORA PALIFERA (Abstract ID: 29209)
Microbial endoliths, which inhabit interior pores of rocks, skeletons and coral, are
ubiquitous in terrestrial and marine environments. Usually, there was a distinct greenpigmented layer within the skeleton of the coral Isopora palifera. To characterize diversity
of endolithic bacteria, 16S rDNA amplicon pyrosequencing was used to investigate
two locations and different depths on Green Island, Taiwan. The dominant bacterial
group in the green layer belonged to the phylum Chlorobi, green sulphur bacteria being
capable of anoxygenic photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation. Specifically,Prosthecochloris
were prevalent in this green layer. Furthermore, to describe the potential function of

Evidence based on four field surveys conducted between July 2009 and April 2011
indicates that both sea surface partial pressures of CO2 (pCO2) and sea–air CO2 fluxes
at Luhuitou fringing reef in Sanya, Hainan Island, northern South China Sea (SCS) are
subject to significant seasonal variations. The diurnal variation of seawater pCO2 ranges
from 264 to 579 μatm in summer, which is much larger than that in autumn (152-335
μatm), in winter (84-260 μatm), and in spring (114-228 μatm). The sea-air CO2 flux in
CO2 m-2 d-1 in spring, ~3.5 mmol CO2 m-2 d-1 in autumn, and ~2.7 mmol CO2 m-2
d-1 in winter). The atmospheric pCO2 in this reef shows small diurnal and seasonal
380

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Coral reefs serve as natural barriers that protect adjacent shorelines from coastal
hazards such as storms, waves and erosion. Projections indicate global degradation of
coral reefs due to anthropogenic impacts and climate change will cause a transition to
net erosion by mid-century. No studies have quantified the amount of regional-scale
accretion or erosion that has occurred since the industrial revolution. Here, we calculate
the spatial gains and losses of seafloor elevation and volume for 5 coral reef ecosystems
in the Atlantic, Pacific and Caribbean over the last several decades. We show that these
reef systems have already transitioned to a net-erosional state. Our most conservative
estimates indicate mean seafloor elevation change at these 5 sites ranges from -0.06 to
-0.8 m, corresponding to net volume losses ranging from 0.2 Mm3 to 52.8 Mm3 (million
cubic meters). Regional-scale loss of seafloor elevation and volume has accelerated the
rate of relative sea level rise, and increased current water depths of coral reef ecosystems to levels not expected until near the year 2100. The magnitude of erosion that has
already occurred, trajectories for continued coral reef degradation and increasing sea
level place these ecosystems and nearby communities at elevated and accelerating risk
to coastal hazards. Our results set a new baseline for projecting future impacts to coastal
communities resulting from erosion of coral reef systems and associated losses of
natural and socio-economic resources.

endoliths along different depths, nine metagenomes of endolithic microbes in coral were
characterized by whole-genome shotgun sequencing approaches. Results showed that
functional traits in coral skeleton along depths were more conserved than bacterial taxa,
which indicated potential functional redundancy of endoliths. This is the first study to
provide a detailed taxonomic and functional profile of endolithic bacteria in coral, and to
determine prevalence of Prosthecochlorisin the green layer. Finally, we infer that 1) these
bacteria may have an important functional role in the coral holobiont in the nutrientlimited coral reef ecosystem; 2) a core functional trait of endoliths in coral shows limited
variation in response to environmental heterogeneity.
com

DISTRIBUTION AND PATTERNS OF POPULATION OUTBREAK OF CROWNOF-THORNS STARFISH IN JAPAN OVER 100 YEARS IN ASSOCIATION WITH
GLOBAL WARMING AND LARVAL DISPERSAL (Abstract ID: 28575)


Population outbreak of the Crown-of-Thorns Starfish (COTS), Acanthaster planci, has
been the major threat to the reef ecosystem in the Indo-Pacific region though their
cause(s) are still unclear. Here, we reviewed the previous records of COTS outbreaks
and occurrence in the Japanese waters over 100 years (1912-2015). Overall, COTS distribution has been extending northwards from the previously northernmost site Amami
Ohshima since 1953. Global warming seems to be partly responsible for the increase in
the frequency and intensity of population outbreaks in the temperate waters. Genetic
homogeneity within Japanese COTS populations indicates that larval dispersal is likely
causing northward migration. The patterns of the two major population outbreaks in
the 1970s and 2000s were complex but had similar patterns. The western Okinawa
main island populations had the highest probability of being the source for secondary
outbreaks within Japan. Amami population is also likely to be an important source
for outbreaks of the temperate waters. On the other hand, population outbreaks have
never been observed at least three regions; Ogasawara, Tokara and Ohsumi Islands.
Ogasawara is located approx. 1000km south of the Kuroshio Current so that infestation
via larval dispersal from other populations might hardly occur. The latter two regions are,
however, located in the middle of Kuroshio Current, implying that there are some key
environmental factors that suppress recruitment and/or juvenile survival.

¬CONSERVING SMALL-SCALE FISHERIES UNDER UNCERTAINTY IN SELFRECRUITMENT USING SIZE LIMITS (Abstract ID: 29976)
A major challenge in managing for conservation and fishery sustainability at small spatial
scales is the unknown amount of external versus self-recruitment, and the applicability of fishery management tools under such conditions. We tested the application of
minimum size limits by using empirical data we gathered to create a mixed-recruitment,
size-structured integral projection model and simulated harvest to determine the size
limit resulting in both increased population abundance and maximum annual harvest for
self-recruitment amounts ranging from 0-100% of total recruitment. Over a wide range
of life histories, a single ‘robust’ size limit resulted in increased population abundance
and therefore sustainable harvest within 10% of the maximum harvest for every possible
recruitment mix. In addition to allowing individuals to reproduce before being harvested,
minimum size limits can also be used to rebuild population abundance and maximize
sustained fishery harvest when managers have no knowledge about recruitment sources.


EFFORTS OF SMALL-SCALE FISHERS IN CORAL REEF CONSERVATION: CASE
ILLUSTRATIONS FROM THAILAND (Abstract ID: 28621)
Coral reefs and small-scale fisheries are closely linked; healthy coral reefs not only
