spp., were predicted to increase slightly. Our latest models incorporate genetic connectivity to predict distributions into the future.


LIVELIHOOD VULNERABILITY OF COASTAL COMMUNITIES TO CHANGES
IN MARINE RESOURCE USE: CASE STUDY OF FIJI AND SOLOMON ISLANDS
(Abstract ID: 28683)
Fisheries support the livelihoods of over half a billion people globally. The Pacific Islands
are surrounded by the sea, therefore most coastal communities traditionally are highly
dependent on marine resources as their main source of animal protein and livelihood.
Their dependence on marine resources makes them highly vulnerable to any change
in the status of these resources. In this study we examined livelihood vulnerability
of coastal communities in Solomon Islands and Fiji to changes in marine resource
availability over time. Household surveys, key informant interviews and focus groups
were conducted in ten communities in Fiji and nine in the Solomon Islands. Livelihood
vulnerability was measured as a function of exposure to changes in marine resource
availability as a result of overharvesting and other anthropogenic pressures; sensitivity
factors related to dependency on and access to these resources; and adaptive capacity
in terms of physical, natural, financial, human and social capital. We find that livelihood
vulnerability of households is highly contextual. Remote communities lacking physical
and financial capital displayed low vulnerability, and the most exposed community may
not necessarily be the most sensitive. However, households that are directly dependent
on marine resources are highly sensitive to any decrease and are extremely vulnerable
if they have low adaptive capacity. Therefore contextual management approaches that
consider the different sources of vulnerability and potential strengths are a necessity in
community-based marine resource management.


ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS SHAPE SPACE USE OF CORAL REEF FISH (Abstract
ID: 28488 | Poster ID: 518)
Variation in the abiotic environment can shape animal movement because it mediates
resource acquisition, reproduction, and competition. For instance temperature governs
fish metabolism, while water motion can structure fish community composition, distributions, and foraging ability. Despite the importance of fish space use on key ecosystem
processes, the effect of the environment on fish mobility and its implications for reef
functioning has not been examined. For 16 months we monitored the movements of 251
acoustically tagged fishes from 39 species within two oceanic reefs in the central Red Sea
and quantified their response to changes in water temperature, tides, current, wind speed,
and lunar and solar ephemerides. Environmental variables influenced both daily cumulative and maximum distance in a large majority of the fish, but with no detectable pattern
across species or trait groups like feeding guild or shoaling behavior. However, we found
a number of predictable effects on fish movement in general. An analysis of the network
formed between fish and its coral reef habitat revealed that fish visited a larger area of the
reef during periods of high tidal amplitude and a smaller area during strong currents. In
addition, the overlap of fish spatial niche decreased at high temperatures even though the
overall distance moved was not significantly affected, presumably due to a concentration
on reef areas of higher productivity. Our results help understand how the role that fish
play on reef resilience might be shaped by a changing environment.


A COMPARATIVE NETWORKANALYSIS OF A MARGINAL REEF FROM THE
EASTERN PACIFIC PRIOR AND AFTER 20 YEARS OF PROTECTION (Abstract ID:
29761 | Poster ID: 524)
Cabo Pulmo is the northern most coral reef in the eastern Pacific and it was declared
as a marine protected area in 1995. It has become an icon of an effective no-fishing
area thanks to the support of the local community. Under the hypothesis that after 20
years of effective protection the ecosystem should be more ‘mature’ sensu Odum, we
built two balanced mass trophic models using Ecopath, one with field data gathered in
1998 and other with 2013 data, to compute biomass flow (Total system throughput. T),
Production/Biomass (P/B), Ascendency, (A), Overhead (O), development capacity (C)
and other ecosystem attibutes. Both models have the same 48 functional groups selected
based on their functional role in the ecosystem. Present P/B = 28.507, Total system
throughput is 43,343.5 t/km2/year, A = 38,896.0 flowbits, O = 63,281.1 flowbits and C
= 116,889.9 flowbits. Even when there has been a notably increase of biomass of the
higher trophic level groups and, as expected, current P/B < 1, total system throughput
has only increased 1%, Ascendency 4%, Overhead 7%, C 5% and O/C, a measure of
system resistance (redundancy), 1%, in comparison with prior to protection condition.
This would suggest that either protection not necessarily leads to maturity or it may take
longer than expected.



CORAL INTERIOR CARBONATE CHEMISTRY MEASURED WITH PH AND
CARBONATE MICROELECTRODES SUGGESTS THAT THE CHEMISTRY OF THE
CALCIFYING FLUID AFFECTS RESILIENCE TO OA (Abstract ID: 28076)

QUANTIFYING THE CONTRIBUTION OF SEA URCHINS TO THE BIOEROSION
OF HAWAIIAN CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 29777)

Reliably predicting how coral calcification may respond to ocean acidification (OA)
depends on our understanding of coral calcification mechanisms and inorganic carbon
processing. To better understand these processes, we used pH and carbonate microelectrodes to profile through coral tissue and into the calcifying fluid in three species
of coral (Acropora millepora, Orbicella faveolata, Turbinaria reniformis). These first
combined measurements of pH and carbonate in corals constrain the inorganic carbon
system allowing inference of CO2, total dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), and alkalinity
concentrations. We observed sharp increases in carbonate and pH from the gastric
cavity to the calcifying fluid, confirming the existence of a proton pumping mechanism.
We also show that corals can achieve a high aragonite saturation state by maintaining

Bioerosional processes from urchins can contribute significantly to the destruction of reef
geomorphology, shifting the balance between erosion and accretion necessary for the
persistence of coral reefs. We estimate the relative contribution of sea urchins to benthic
erosional processes inside and adjacent to a long-term no-take MPA in the Hawaiian
Islands, hypothesizing that bioerosional contributions would be dominated by sea urchins
outside of the reserve, where urchin predators are targeted by fisheries. At 50 sites inside
and adjacent to the ‘Āhihi Kīna’u Natural Area Reserve, divers observed the size frequency
of urchins using standard visual survey methods. Empirically-derived relationships

47

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Light driven photolysis of water is believed to provide all the elementary oxygen found
in nature. The evolution of photosynthesis, the only known biological photolytic process,
profoundly shaped the face of this planet. This has led to the assumption that photosynthesis is the only significant source of ecological primary production, and the main input
to consider when calculating a total ecosystem oxygen budget. However, during our
attempts to calculate just such a budget, a prevalent, globally observed spike in dissolved
oxygen concentration occurring at night altered our assumptions regarding primary
production. These spikes have been observed across a multitude of tropical environments over many years, as evidenced by our own research and an exhaustive literature
survey of studies involving high resolution, overnight dissolved oxygen measurements.
Calculating a complete and accurate oxygen budget will need to include the contribution of these nighttime dissolved oxygen concentration spikes where ever they occur,
regardless of whether they are biotic or abiotic in origin. Using a combination of field
and experimental measurements, we show that: 1) this phenomenon can be isolated in
vitro using benthic samples collected from a coral reef, 2) it is strongly associated with
crustose coralline algae, and 3) it cannot be explained by a purely abiotic process. This
leads to the prediction of a biological source for these nighttime dissolved oxygen spikes,
and suggests that a process other than canonical photosynthesis may be involved.

between bioerosional rate and body size were then used to estimate the total bioerosional
contribution for urchins based on their size-specific densities at each site. Urchin communities were dominated by the rock-boring urchin Echinometra mathaei and the red slate
pencil urchin Heterocentrotus mamillatus with lower densities of five other urchin species.
A better understanding of the bioerosional contribution of urchins provides vital information for the understanding of thresholds in the accretion-erosion dynamics of coral reefs.

APPLICATION OF SATELLITE SST-BASED CORAL DISEASE OUTBREAK PREDICTIONS FOR HAWAII (Abstract ID: 28853)
Remote sensing of sea surface temperature (SST) has become increasingly valuable for
identifying threats to coral reefs in recent years. Here, we compare field observations
with satellite-based predictions of disease prevalence for the three most common coral
diseases in Hawaii: Montipora white syndrome, Porites growth anomalies and Porites
tissue loss syndrome, with data collected from 18 Hawaiian Islands and atolls between
2004 and 2015. Our predictive boosted regression tree models were created using
risk up to 6 months prior to an expected outbreak event. Our results suggest winter
pre-conditioning and host density are key drivers of disease susceptibility. However, the
relative influence of seasonal thermal metrics varied with the specific disease. Coral
disease outbreaks often occur subsequent to bleaching events, although the underlying
relationship explaining this pattern remains unclear. In light of the recent mass coral
bleaching in Hawaii, it will be useful to closely monitor coral health in the upcoming year.
Experimental coral disease outbreak tools are currently available through NOAA Coral
Reef Watch; the models here can improve interpretations of the near real-time products
for these Hawaiian diseases. This enhances management capacity to prepare for and
respond to emerging coral diseases and can be modified for other diseases and regions
around the world. Additional remotely sensed parameters, such as ocean color metrics,
could enhance such models in the near future.


PILOTING A WATERSHED-SCALE MODEL FOR COLLABORATIVELY ADDRESSING LBSP STRESSORS ON CORAL REEFS IN WEST MAUI, HAWAII, USA (Abstract
ID: 28492)
In response to the complexity of stressors contributing to the decline of live coral in
West Maui, Hawaii, USA and the need to go beyond managing ocean pressures to
addressing land based pollutants, a collaborative partnership cutting across jurisdictions and interests called the West Maui Ridge to Reef Initiative (R2R) was formed in
2012. The network of partnerships in the R2R including those enabled through US
Coral Reef Task Force and State priority watershed designations have been central to
early successes and shared lessons learned in the region. The R2R is led by federal and
state agencies that provide funding and oversight for watershed management planning
and implementation in West Maui, as well as technical and research support. However,
without the support from the community, landowners, and other local stakeholders, the
buy-in is missing for implementation of proposed mitigation strategies. As a result, a local working group representing targeted land and ocean interests was formed to provide
practical insights that facilitate the transition from watershed planning to implementation. A loosely defined Hui (team) of non-profits, researchers and consultants carry out
recommended strategies on a project by project basis. Lessons learned to date follow
themes universally relevant to watershed managers, such as the importance of sufficient
scientific information, the barrier maintenance presents where capacity is limited, the
importance of an institutional support structure and the degree of community and local
government engagement needed to remain relevant.


REEF FISH SURVEY TECHNIQUES: ASSESSING THE POTENTIAL FOR STANDARDIZING METHODOLOGIES (Abstract ID: 29872 | Poster ID: 270)
Dramatic changes in reef fish populations have been documented globally and, in
response, the research community has initiated efforts to assess and monitor reef fish
assemblages. A variety of visual census techniques are employed, however results are
often incomparable due to differential performance of methods. Although comparability
of data may promote improved assessment and management of nearshore fisheries, to
date no standardized and agreed-upon survey method has emerged. This study aims to
describe the use of methods across the research community and to test potential factors
linked with selection of method. An online survey was distributed to researchers from
academic, government, and non-government organizations internationally. Although
many methods were identified, 89% of survey-based projects employed one of only
three methods – belt transect, stationary point count, and some variation of the timed
swim method. The selection of survey methods was found to be independent of the research design (assessment goal) and region of study, but related to the researcher’s home
institution. While some researchers expressed willingness to modify their current survey
protocols to more standardized protocols (76%), their willingness decreased when
methodologies were tied to long-term datasets of ongoing projects of 5 or more years.
Willingness to modify current methodologies was also less common among academic
researchers than resource managers. By understanding both the current application of
methods and the reported motivations for method selection, we hope to focus discussions towards increasing the comparability of quantitative reef fish survey data.

ACROPORA CERVICORNIS SEXUAL CORAL REPRODUCTION TO COMPLEMENT THE RESTORATION PROGRAM IN NURSERIES IN THE DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC (Abstract ID: 28395)
In recent decades there has been a reported decline in the abundance of corals
worldwide. As part of a strategy to reduce the degradation of reefs and contribute
to the recovery of diminished coral populations, nurseries and areas of transplanted
coral fragments have been established in different parts of the world. In the Caribbean
Acropora cervicornis loss has resulted in a reduced ability to successfully reproduce both
sexually and asexually. In the Dominican Republic there are coral gardening programs
of this species in coral nurseries has been evaluate in order to supplement the program.
Histological sections of fertile polyps confirmed the maturity of the gonads prior to
spawning. Collection of gametes and assisted reproduction was conducted as well as
the observation and documentation of the stages of embryonic development, larval
development, larval settlement and metamorphosis into primary polyps. Currently, tests
are underway for the incorporation of symbionts. It was documented that in nurseries
the largest fragments had the highest percentage of spawning, presenting a lower rate
of growth, while fragments that did not spawn showed a higher rate of growth. It is
important to combine restoration techniques not only to restore degraded areas but also
to ensure the genetic diversity of the species.


NIGHTTIME DISSOLVED OXYGEN SPIKES ACROSS CORAL REEF ENVIRONMENTS: BIOLOGICAL OR NOT? (Abstract ID: 28946)

48

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS



LEGACIES OF THE PAST FEED MISMATCHES BETWEEN REGULATIONS AND
CORAL REEF FISHERIES (Abstract ID: 30142)
Fisheries regulations should evolve in response to improved science and the changing
dynamics of the fisheries in question. However, the legacy of past regulations may still
manifest themselves when they are no longer appropriate. This may be particularly
evident in small-scale fisheries in developing island nations where resources and capacity to respond are limited. As a case study, we investigated the fisheries legislation of
the Turks and Caicos Islands in order to identify any mismatches with the fisheries they
are designed to regulate, and to assess the obstacles preventing these mismatches from
being rectified. Numerous mismatches were evident, particularly for the most economically important fishery, spiny lobster (Panulirus argus). Some long-standing regulations
have become culturally engrained, and are enshrined along with an outdated or incorrect
understanding of the species’ ecology. Confronting these mismatches would be met with
heavy resistance, and could also jeopardise the credibility of the management authority.

CAN ANYONE BE A SCIENTIST? EXPLORING THE ROLE OF CITIZEN SCIENCE
IN CORAL REEF RESEARCH (Abstract ID: 29893)
Individuals lacking scientific training have made important contributions in many disciplines historically, but the role and value of public participation in modern professional
research is controversial within the scientific community. Beneficially, citizen scientists
provide a source of labor, a variety of skills, and capital, for example, paying to spend
their vacations participating in environmental and ecological research. This link between
the public and research serves as a bridge between science and education, creating a
more environmentally informed populace. Additionally, citizen science is becoming a
major supplement to undergraduate degree programs, providing opportunity for students
to acquire applied field experience. At the same time, the contributions of non-scientists
are questioned and more easily dismissed by the scientific community on the basis that
the data they collect may not be accurate. Through a survey of participants, organizers,
and scientists, this study evaluates and compares the role of both public and studentoriented citizen science in coral reef research, with a case study focused on the Central
Caribbean Marine Institute on Little Cayman Island, at which the lead author participated in an ongoing National Science Foundation Research Experience for Undergraduates program. We examine stakeholder perceptions, interest, engagement, quality of
experience, and outcomes, with the goal of identifying challenges and opportunities that,
if addressed, could optimize the use and effectiveness of citizen science programming,
and resulting outreach.


CHANGES IN THE ULTRASTRUCTURE OF THE CORAL POCILLOPORA DAMICORNIS EXPOSED BY HIGH TEMPERATURE, ULTRAVIOLET AND FAR-RED
RAYS (Abstract ID: 28600 | Poster ID: 427)
Light and temperature are known stressors causing the collapse of coral-algal symbioses. However, it has been poorly understood how these stressors induce coral degradation in an early stage. Here we investigated ultrastructural changes in coral tissues and
symbiotic zooxanthellae under high temperature (HT), ultraviolet (UV) and far-red (FR)
rays. Coral was collected from Tosa Bay, Japan and small fragments were maintained
in glass dishes with sterilized seawater at ambient room condition. Regenerating corals
were placed on 32C water bath, while other exposed to UV-A (4.5 w/m2) and FR (2.0
w/m2) rays. After 15min–48h treatments, samples were fixed and embedded in resin.
consists of epidermis and gastrodermis interconnected by acellular matrix mesoglea.
Zooxanthellae were enclosed by two membrane-like structures in the cytoplasm of
gastrodermis. There were few autophagosomes and lysosomes in the coral tissues.
After 6h exposure to FR and UV-A, dark granules appeared along with vacuolization of
gastrodermal cells. Prolonged light treatments brought brought about fragmentation and
destruction of cytoplasmic contents. This eventually led the collapse of gastrodermis
then release of gastrodermal cells containing zooxanthellae in the gastric cavity. Zooxanthellae were remarkably affected where thylakoids and cortical membranes partially
rupture. Autophagosome densities gradually increase. Treatment with HT also induced
gastrodermal degrdadation, zooxanthellae disruptions and autophagic structure.


ACOUSTIC DIVERSITY AND BEHAVIOR OF CORAL REEF FISH AGGREGATIONS
FROM SONAR SURVEYS (Abstract ID: 29625)
Coral reef ecosystems are among the most diverse and productive in our oceans. Over
4000 species of teleost fishes are associated with coral reefs, raising challenges to
monitor the abundance and the distribution of reef fish in order to develop an effective
conservation policy and to evaluate the effect of management actions. Fisheries acoustics is one of the tools that is widely used in fishery assessments, but remote species
identification is challenging in diverse reef systems with limited studies on acoustic
characteristics of reef species. The work proposed here is an attempt at improving the
marine ecosystems acoustics for the study of coral reef fish communities. We review
long-term marine ecosystem acoustic surveys in the US Caribbean and evaluate metrics
that describe behavioral patterns and species-specific acoustic characteristics of coral
reef species. Based on these metrics, schools and aggregations were clustered into 5
distinct groups. The use of underwater video surveys from a Remote Operating Vehicle
(ROV) conducted in the proximity of the acoustic observations allowed us to associate
the clusters with broad categories of species groups such as large predators, including
fishery important species to small forage fishes. The distribution of the clustered aggregations was then paired with habitat–related metrics derived from multibeam surveys in
order to evaluate the association of coral reef species with habitat complexity that could
further improve species classification during acoustic surveys and develop predictive
models of species distribution. Challenges and possible applications of the approaches
used in this work are presented and discussed.


MANGROVE HABITATS SELECT CORAL POPULATIONS TOLERANT OF PH
AND TEMPERATURE CONDITIONS PREDICTED FOR REEFS UNDER CLIMATE
CHANGE (Abstract ID: 28099)


Corals can persist in environments that are considered extreme and approach the edge of
conditions where corals normally thrive. Within tropical reef systems, mangrove habitats
routinely experience reduced pH and elevated temperature that effectively parallel (or
exceed) climate conditions predicted over the next 100 years. Corals persisting among mangroves are thus potentially “future proofed” but to date have been largely unstudied. Exactly
how corals are able to survive under these extremes is unknown. We present data from two
reef-adjacent mangrove systems from the Indian (Seychelles) and Pacific (New Caledonia)
Oceans. As expected, coral diversity and abundance is lower among the mangroves than
on the neighbouring reef. However, several species observed in the mangroves are those
that comprise the main neighbouring coral reef framework. Novel “pH-performance assays”
for key coral species demonstrated that mangrove populations appear to thrive by diel
downregulation of metabolic processes during the most extreme pH-temperatures, whereas
reef populations attempt metabolic regulation that incurs a cost to their overall fitness. We
also identify how high organic content, paralleled with increased respiratory metabolism,
suggests that heterotrophic plasticity is important in facilitating coral acclimatisation to
combined hot-acidic waters. Together these data reveal key physiological traits potentially
required for corals to survive climate change. We also highlight present day coral populations that could become central to future reef restoration programs.

CHANGE STRESSORS (Abstract ID: 29495)
Ocean acidification (OA) stands to influence the physiological functioning of a variety
of marine calcifiers. While many of these responses have been documented for reef
invertebrates, we know relatively little about the responses of other taxonomic groups,
primarily calcified green algae. Furthermore, in addition to elevated CO2, the interactive
investigated, which can add complexity to previously documented responses. We present a series of mesocosm experiments that describe both the singular and combined
effects of OA and thermal stress on several species of calcified green algae. Multiple
experiments with Halimeda incrassata, Halimeda simulans and Halimeda opuntia were
conducted in independent tanks which replicated a variety of pCO2 (400-1400 ppm) and
temperature treatments (28-31°C). Measured responses included calcification (alkalinity
anomaly and buoyant weight), photosynthetic output (oxygen evolution), and mineral
CaCO3 content (gravimetric acidification). Data show that while calcification generally
declined with OA for multiple species, elevated temperature had an opposing effect,
serving to increase both calcification and photosynthetic production. Thus, in certain
49

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


cation rates and benthic composition and cover, with environmental factors to document
and assess the frequency of major disturbances and their impacts across decadal and
century time-scales. Calcification rates for the Great Barrier Reef suffered an 11%
decline between the late 20th and early 21st century, following two major widespread
bleaching events in 1998 and 2002. Calcification records from a subset of these coral
colonies, collected a decade later, indicate that calcification rates recovered from these
thermal stress events within 3-4 years, returning to baseline calcification rates. These
skeletal growth records provide a long-term assessment of how individual coral colonies
respond to stress events, enabling us to quantify rates of recovery. In this presentation
we will compare trends in coral calcification with shifts in community composition to
understand and define the frequency and severity of major disturbances and assess
recovery trends on reefs along the Great Barrier Reef.

WATERSHED RUNOFF AND SEDIMENT RESUSPENSION: FACTORS AFFECTING
USVI (Abstract ID: 29153 | Poster ID: 438)


cases, elevated temperature (+3°C) may mitigate OA effects. Subsequent experiments

Land-based erosion and terrigenous sedimentation is a major coral reef stressor in
terrigenous sedimentation by up to an order of magnitude above background. Once
deposited, resuspension of benthic sediment may further increase turbidity and deposition (T-D). However, isolating the relative contributions of runoff vs. resuspension using
conventional sediment trap monitoring has proven challenging. Here we describe the
spatial variability of marine sediment dynamics in response to runoff vs. resuspension
events in St. John and compare monthly vs. high-resolution monitoring approaches.
Nephelometers (10-min. res.) were deployed beside sediment traps (~monthly res.) at
three reef and four shoreline sites next to ephemeral stream outfalls equipped with water
level sensors (10-min. res.) and peak crest gauges (~2-week res.). Monthly mean sediment trap accumulation rates and nephelometer data were strongly correlated. Runoff
events resulted in high-magnitude (up to 900/17,000 times background) but short-lived
longer (days-weeks), particularly at sites with finer-grained benthic sediments, and were
associated with increased wave height during low tides. While the relative contribution of runoff vs. resuspension to T-D was spatially variable, both processes produced
responses that greatly exceeded water quality standards and coral stress thresholds for
short timeframes (hours to days).

SEASONAL VARIATIONS IN STABLE ISOTOPIC VALUES OF PARTICULATE ORGANIC MATTER FROM LUHUITOU FRINGING REEFS, SOUTH CHINA (Abstract
ID: 27837 | Poster ID: 305)
Coral reefs have suffered remarkable declines of both coral cover and coral species
worldwide. Nutrient over-enrichment is considered to be one of the causes of coral
decline. Luhuitou fringing reefs, south of Sanya city, is a famous tourism spot and much
influenced by anthropogenic activities. This study reviews current nutrient status of
fringing reefs in South China and evaluates primary nutrient sources using stable isotopic
method. Results show that d13C and d15N values of particular organic matter (POM)
are statistically significant with seasons. In dry seasons (spring and winter), there are
more terrestrials and anthropogenic-derived nutrients; and in wet seasons (summer
and autumn), there are more marine derived nutrients. The overall d13C values suggest
marine and terrestrial-derived nutrient sources. Organic carbon is a mixture of marine
phytoplankton, marine benthic algae and terrestrial-derived plants. The d15N values
suggest terrestrial-derived sewage and upwelling-dominated nitrogen sources. In the
presence of natural upwelling and coastal currents, coastal coral reef areas are more
vulnerable to the increasing anthropogenic nutrient inputs. These results provide some
understanding of the declining coral reef ecosystem and the importance of conservation areas and coastal coral reef resource management.



CLIMATE VARIABILITY AND THE RESILIENCE OF LOW DIVERSITY CORAL
COMMUNITIES TO BLEACHING IN THE GILBERT ISLANDS, KIRIBATI (Abstract
ID: 28273 | Poster ID: 207)

HITCHHIKING IN THE SEA: EVIDENCE OF VECTORS TRANSPORTING THE
THE SOUTHWESTERN ATLANTIC OCEAN (Abstract ID: 29676)

Ocean warming due to climate change threatens to cause frequent coral bleaching and
degrade coral reefs across the Pacific. Recent research has suggested that past temperature experience, including exposure to variable temperatures and/or frequent heat stress,
confer greater resilience to climate change. The central equatorial Pacific, where the El
Niño / Southern Oscillation, drives year-to-year shifts in current strength, current direction and consequently ocean temperatures, is an ideal natural laboratory for evaluating
the influence of past sea surface temperatures (SST) on the susceptibility of individual
corals and coral communities to heat stress. This presentation describes changes in the
coral community over the past decade, including multiple El Nino-driven heat stress
events, in the little-studied Gilbert Islands of Kiribati. Changes in benthic cover, coral size
distribution as well as the bleaching index (for the 2009-2010 El Niño) are contrasted
between a matrix of sites exposed to different levels of SST variability and human
disturbance across four atolls. Spatial analysis shows that patterns in coral bleaching are
weeks). The long-term data indicates that reefs subject to the combination of high
human disturbance and high temperature variability are the most resilient to heat stress,
due to the presence, and continued expansion, of the “weedy” species Porites rus.

Human activities are responsible for an unprecedented connectivity in the marine environment. The opportunistic and highly competitive invasive species Tubastraea coccinea
over 3,000km, including oil platforms and monobouys. This study presents the first data
on the genetic diversity and population structure of both species from rocky shores, oil
platforms and a monobuoy along the Brazilian coast using 11-12 microsatellite loci. A
high number of clones were found for both species, particularly in the coastal populations.
The occurrence of repeated MLG and small values of genotypic richness observed at
coastal populations indicates that these are most clonal, originated mainly from asexual
reproduction. Despite the small number of individuals, in both species the vectors had
the highest allelic diversity and expected heterozigosity compared to rocky shores, which
tagusensis, which might be explained by introductions from the same native population.
that the coast, oil platforms and monobouys share alleles, indicating that the latter two
have relevant roles in the spreading of both invasive species along the Brazilian coast.



PHYSIOLOGICAL STRATEGIES TO ACCLIMATISE TO HIGH SEAWATER TEMPERATURE STRESS WHEN HOSTING DIFFERENT SYMBIODINIUM (Abstract ID:
29165)

FREQUENCY OF MAJOR STRESS EVENTS ON THE GREAT BARRIER REEF:
LONG-TERM TRENDS IN CALCIFICATION AND COMMUNITY COMPOSITION
AS INDICATORS OF REEF RECOVERY (Abstract ID: 29843)

One mechanism to survive bleaching events is for the host to shuffle to a more thermally
there is a tradeoff for corals. But the interactive physiology and fitness benefits of hosting
clade D are poorly understood. The South of Taiwan provides a perfect scenario to
is a constant hot water effluent with an average SST during summer of 2.0–3.0°C higher

Defining, measuring and monitoring coral reef health is fundamental to understanding
the future of coral reefs in a changing ocean. Long-term trends in reef health improve
our understanding of how dynamic reef processes alter the composition and productivity of reef ecosystems in order to identify resilient reef habitats for management. In this
study we combine two key indicators of coral reef health, annual trends in colony calcifi50

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

than at other sites. In this research with the use of reciprocal transplantation experiments
(RTE) the physiological processes ofLeptoria phrygia, coral that associates with clade D
at the OL and clade C in Wanlitong, a site that is not influenced by hot water stress, are
being monitored during 18 months. Growth rate, chlorophyll a fluorescence, algae density, protein, and lipids are being measured and compared with Porites lutea, a specialist
species that associates with the stress-tolerant Symbiodinium clade C15 to understand
the different physiological strategies corals have. Preliminary results indicate that only
those corals transplanted from Wanlitong to OL that were able to shuffle to clade D
survived the hot water stress during the summer. And those corals transplanted from OL
to Wanlitong are performing better than the control group. This study will help determine
how corals will acclimatise to high SST under future climate change scenarios.

INTEGRATING WATERSHED AND HYDRODYNAMIC MODELS TO QUANTIFY
LAND-DERIVED SEDIMENTATION ON REEFS (Abstract ID: 29256)
Land-based sediment transported by rivers and plumes is a major cause of coral reef
destruction. However, there are very few integrated quantitative studies that can be used
to track sediment transport between land and sea realms. To address this gap, quantitative
watershed and hydrodynamic models were linked to describe the sediment exposure of
coral reefs in El Nido, Philippines. We used the Soil and Water Assessment Tool to identify
critical watersheds that had high sediment yield. We then inputted the sediment load data
to Delft3D Flow model to estimate dispersal and deposition of suspended sediments by
river plumes. We calibrated and validated the models using low cost water level and light
sensors to ensure accuracy of estimated discharge and suspended sediment concentration.
We then estimated the exposure of coral reefs to sedimentation by using different scenarios of land use, precipitation, winds and ocean variability. We found that high discharge
plume boundaries covered areas in the North of the inner Bacuit Bay, wherein some reefs
and islands are used for tourism. This sediment is predominantly Coron-Malalag clay and
sourced from a subbasin which is 47% shrubland, 30% forest and 23% mangrove. Hydrologic retention time in the North embayment is relatively long, causing extended periods
of turbid water episodes. This study highlights the utility of quantitative models to describe
the effects of land-based activities on reefs, and the importance of integrated studies in
order to manage sedimentation and land-sea interactions more effectively.

BACTERIAL VIRULENCE GENE EXPRESSION UNDER HIGH CONCENTRATIONS
OF DOC PROVIDES INSIGHT INTO THE PATHOGENIC SWITCH IN OPPORTUNISTIC MICROBES (Abstract ID: 28679)
Algal cover in tropical coral reefs has increased worldwide leading to the alteration
of the biogeochemical cycling and microbial metabolism, by the release of DOC-rich
exudates. Algal exudates support the growth of virulent bacterioplankton populations,
which consequently affect reef health deterioration and disease emergence. However,
these same bacterial populations are also associated with healthy reefs, where they fulfill
key functions to support the ecosystem. To date there has been no compelling evidence
correlating environmental conditions triggering virulence in these opportunists. To shed
light on this matter, we evaluated microbial gene expression of the most dominant
microbial populations under elevated concentrations of dissolved neutral monosaccharides (DNM) naturally present in algal exudates. Through metagenomic sequencing, we successfully assembled 3 near-complete (>95%) and 20 population genomes
(>50%) representing from 14.2 to 30.6% of the community. Bacterial mRNA reads were
isolated, sequenced, and mapped to the recovered genomes to determine differential
gene expression. The differential gene expression analysis showed a high number of
genes involved in pathogenesis during the DNM enrichments, including genes encoding
cholera-like toxins and proteins involved in hydrogen sulfide synthesis. Our findings
suggest that elevated concentrations of DNM act as a driver of expression of virulence
genes in coral reef ecosystems and provide a mechanistic explanation for a functional
switch of opportunistic to pathogenic bacteria.


DEFINING SUCCESS IN ACTIVE CARIBBEAN ACROPORID POPULATION
REPLENISHMENT EFFORTS: RESULTS FROM OVER NINE YEARS OF WORK IN
SOUTHERN BELIZE (Abstract ID: 27909)
Coral restoration efforts are becoming more accepted as an active management tool
but still lack a realistic sense of scale, and quantifiable, comparable, success indicators.
Specific active replenishment goals are to restore lost ecosystem services like shoreline
protection, fisheries enhancement, biodiversity preservation, and provisioning of
aesthetic and economic services for the tourism industry. Continuity is key to ecosystem
service values, which requires that the restored coral community be (1) self-sustaining
and self-propagating, and (2) resilient against persistent insults. Genetic diversity must be
addressed regardless of propagation methods. How much genetic diversity is needed?
What amount of coral coverage, and where, is needed to trigger natural regenerative
processes at larger scales? Presented here are data from over nine years of acroporid
restoration efforts at Laughing Bird Caye National Park, Belize, where over 26,000
nursery-grown acroporid fragments have been out-planted. Data were acquired on
host and algal clade diversity, growth rates and survival, bleaching history, reproductive
indicators, methods for measuring live coral cover over time, methods to assess changes
in fish biomass on out-planted sites, and mechanisms to include local community
members in the work. We suggest realizable goals and success indicators, offer guidance
for expanding restoration efforts to new sites, and recognize Marine Protected Areas and
stakeholder involvement as key to coral restoration.


ASSESSING MITIGATION EFFORTS TO REDUCE SEDIMENT RUNOFF ON
(Abstract ID: 28376)
Coral reefs have declined dramatically in the US Virgin Islands (USVI) over the past several decades. Sedimentation is a major stress to USVI coral reefs. Previous work found
increased terrigenous sedimentation below developed watersheds in St. John. Erosion
control measures recently put in place appear to be at least partially effective. To determine whether mitigated sediment runoff has reached pre-development levels, we are reconstructing historical proxy-based sedimentation records using geochemical signatures
in coral cores. We will compare changes in proxy-based sedimentation records over time
as well as between Coral Bay (a developed watershed) and Lameshur Bay (a relatively
undeveloped watershed), allowing for comparison of how land use change has increased
sedimentation in a recently developed watershed. Long-term records of sedimentation
onto reefs in St. John based on metal/Ca records from Siderastrea siderea coral cores
will be presented, in addition to results from a replication study from multiple short coral
core-tops collected adjacent to one another. Cores were also collected adjacent to sediment traps that have recorded seasonal changes in sedimentation over multiple years,
thus allowing the possibility of ground-truthing the proxy-based records to actual sediment runoff quantities. Understanding the efficacy of various erosion control methods
is vital to controlling anthropogenic inputs in other watersheds. The records constructed
here will provide feedback for watershed management strategies employed on St. John
and other similar high islands.


GROWTH AND DEMOGRAPHY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN ENDEMIC SOLITARY CORAL BALANOPHYLLIA EUROPAEA LIVING ALONG A NATURAL PCO2
GRADIENT (Abstract ID: 28605)
Increasing research effort on marine calcifying organisms is important and urgent, given
the projected CO2-driven ocean acidification for the coming century. Here we assess the
51

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

The Great Barrier Reef (GBR) World Heritage Area includes one of the world’s largest
seagrass ecosystems (35 000 km2) with approximately 20% of the world’s seagrass
species. Key to understanding and managing this important ecosystem is reliable data on
seagrass distribution, abundance and species composition, and how this changes through
time. A range of mapping and monitoring programs since the 1980s have documented
GBR seagrasses. These include GBR-wide coastal and seabed seagrass mapping through
the 1980s and 1990s and a biodiversity mapping project in 2004; reef-top meadow
mapping adjacent to shipping lanes as part of an oil spill response atlas in the remote
northern GBR (2011-2014); and small-scale but long-term (>15 years) monitoring
access the full range of seagrass spatial data in a format that included a range of scales,
site and meadow information, nor could they interrogate the reliability of the dataset. We
found, evaluated and incorporated over 300 seagrass spatial data sets collected from the
GBR spanning 30 years into two publicly available GIS layers. We include information on
seagrass presence/absence, percent cover, biomass, species present, dominant species,
meadow area and survey date. This management tool allows seagrass information to be
categorized depending on management questions regarding development, zoning, and
planning, and is available for resource managers to model connectivity, better understand
seagrass change, identify regions where seagrass information is deficient, and identify key
seagrass areas for dugong and turtles.

growth and population dynamics of the Mediterranean endemic zooxanthellate solitary
age-length relationships, obtained for each site by sclerochronology through computerized tomography, resulted homogeneous and then data were pooled to obtain a general
age-length relationship. Skeletal linear extension rate and bulk skeletal density were
measured and net calcification rate was calculated for each sample at each site. While
linear extension rate did not vary with pCO2, bulk skeletal density and net calcification
rate decreased with increasing pCO2. The population age structure was obtained by
analyzing photoquadrats and several observed and theoretical demographic parameters
were derived (age structure stability, instantaneous rate of mortality, average age, % of
immature individuals, age at maximum biomass, average age of biomass) and compared
among sites. Populations showed a deficiency of young individuals with increasing pCO2.
The species seems sensitive to ocean acidification even if the photosynthetic efficiency
of its symbionts increases with pCO2, suggesting an even higher sensitivity for shallow
water non-zooxanthellate scleractinians.

A 3000 YEAR RECORD OF ABUNDANCE AND DYNAMICS OF THE KEYSTONE
URCHIN DIADEMA ANTILLARUM FROM ANALYSIS OF SUBFOSSIL SPINES
FROM REEF SEDIMENT CORES (Abstract ID: 30055 | Poster ID: 5)


COMPETITIVE STRATEGIES OF THE CORALLIMORPH RHODACTIS HOWESII:
ALLELOPATHIC EFFECTS ON CORAL MICROBIOMES AT PALMYRA ATOLL
(Abstract ID: 29866)

The long-spined sea urchin Diadema antillarum has been described as a keystone grazer
in Caribbean coral reef ecosystems. In the 1980s an unknown pathogen resulted in a
mass die-off that caused a near extinction of this population across the Caribbean,
catalyzing an explosion in macroalgal cover that led to a region-wide decline in coral
abundance. Because of Diadema’s importance as the last abundant reef herbivore
following the overfishing of herbivorous fishes and its failure to recover following the
mass dieoff, it is important to understand its baseline abundance and prospects for future
recovery. However, little is known of the natural dynamics of this species due to the lack
of a historical baseline. We reconstructed a 3000 year record of Diadema abundance by
isolating and weighing spines preserved in reef matrix cores collected from three reefs in
Bocas del Toro, Panama. We found that Diadema was a consistently rare component of
the urchin community at the midslope zone (6-8m), comprising only 3% of total urchin
spine weight on average. Diadema abundance was closely linked to reef accretion rates,
indicating its strong reliance on coral-dominated habitat. Other than declines associated
with declines in reef accretion, we did not find any evidence of previous mass dieoffs.
We also found no evidence of an increase in Diadema abundance over the historical
period due to prey release from overfishing. These results reveal that Diadema’s failure
to recover following the dieoff may be related to the degradation of coral habitat in
subsequent decades.

Phase shifts from coral to algal dominance have become increasingly common on coral
reefs around the globe, often in association with anthropogenic activities. However,
alternative states can include other benthic organisms such as soft corals, sea anemones,
sponges, or corallimorpharians, and are often associated with large-scale physical
disturbances. Here, we focus on the invasion of Rhodactis howesii , a corallimorpharian on the coral reefs of Palmyra Atoll. Despite the apparent competitive dominance
and demonstrated invasive potential of the corallimorph, little is known about the
mechanisms involved in its spread across around the atoll. We used a laboratory experiment involving the exposure of the reef building coral Acropora yongei to corallimorph
crude extract to investigate potential allelopathic effects of the extract on the coral
microbiome. Exposure to the extract resulted in significant tissue loss and a decrease in
photosynthetic efficiency of the corals. Samples were taken from degraded and healthy
Acropora tissue for metagenomic analysis to look at shifts in the microbial communities
present. This study represents an important initial step in determining what provides
Rhodactis howesii with its competitive abilities and will help further our understanding of
the invasion occurring at Palmyra Atoll.



ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE TO CORAL REEFS IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
AND INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION UNDER THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF THE SEA (Abstract ID: 29776)
Recent island building activities and unrestrained exploitation on the reefs of the South
China Sea raise questions regarding national obligations under international treaties.
An historic test of these obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS) was heard before the UN Permanent Court of Arbitration at the
International Court of Justice in the Hague in November, 2015. Evidence was presented
to document the extensive coral reef damage from dredging for island building in the
South China Sea. Scientific evidence indicates that this damage to coral reefs is likely
to influence reef productivity throughout the region, including in adjacent exclusive
economic zones. Additional evidence of unrestrained exploitation targeting giant clams,
corals and reef fishes was presented that are indicative of poor fisheries management
and causing additional threats to endangered species. The Permanent Court of Arbitration accepted to hear the case under UNCLOS and environmental lawyers argued that
these actions contravene UNCLOS treaty obligations. Arguments were also made that
actions violating the UN Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries support the case
first half of 2016, will have far-reaching policy implications for environmental actions in
disputed waters.

EFFECTS OF BLEACHING ON CORAL REPRODUCTION (Abstract ID: 28887)
Bleaching profoundly impacts coral reproduction often for years after an event. However
detailed reproductive characteristics of coral post-bleaching have not been broadly
described, especially as it relates to cryopreservation. Therefore, we measured a number
of reproductive characteristics in coral in Kaneohe Bay in Hawaii in two species, Fungia
scutaria and Montipora capitata during the bleaching period of 2014 and 2015. We
examined and compared comprehensively with historical data: 1) spawning periods; 2)
egg morphometry; 3) sperm concentration; 4) fresh and cryopreserved sperm motility
exposed to differing concentrations of dimethyl sulfoxide; 5) time of first cleavage; 6)
larval survival with fresh and cryopreserved sperm; 7) infection success; and 8) settlement success. Virtually all parameters of reproduction were reduced due to warming
and bleaching stress. Because of this, we were interested in how cryo-stress might affect
fertilization success and the time of first cleavage. In stressed fresh eggs and sperm, the
addition of dimethyl sulfoxide altered the time of first cleavage. Moreover, once sperm
was cryopreserved, this resulted in a steep decline in post-thaw viability and prevented
any substantive further use in reproduction for conservation benefit. Worldwide as
bleaching events become more frequent, the ability to bank and conserve coral ex situ
will become significantly reduced. Thus, it is imperative that while genetic diversity is
still high in these populations that intensive efforts are made to bank coral species during
non-bleaching periods.


A SPATIAL MANAGEMENT TOOL FOR SEAGRASSES IN THE GREAT BARRIER
REEF WORLD HERITAGE AREA (Abstract ID: 27805)

52

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


harvest regulations – forms of conventional management often heralded as optimal in
well-managed and over-fished systems, respectively. Optimal PHC design was sensitive
to overharvesting; regardless PHCs were more effective at achieving the multiple objectives than either conventional method. Key to the results is the fishers’ ability to reduce
fish wariness and increase catchability in PHCs targeting finfish using strategic harvest
schedules. These findings challenge the dogma that PHCs are simply a cultural legacy to
be accommodated by contemporary fisheries science, and instead place PHCs center
stage as a potentially optimal fisheries management strategies.

IDENTIFYING SOURCES OF RESILIENCE IN CORAL COMMUNITIES USING A
SPATIAL AGENT-BASED MODEL (Abstract ID: 28449)
Identifying attributes of coral reefs that confer resilience in the face of multiple stressors
is a pressing challenge, but one that is logistically difficult to meet. By facilitating simultaneous manipulation of processes and attributes that would otherwise be too numerous
or unwieldy to explore experimentally, agent-based models (ABMs) provide one valuable approach. Here we describe a spatially explicit, 2-dimensional ABM designed to
elucidate if and how functional diversity (FD) within coral reef communities moderates
resilience in response to multiple stressors. Each grid cell of the ABM covers 1 cm2 of
a reef benthic community, and can represent part of a coral colony, a patch of algae,
or a portion of barren ground. Agents can change their state through time in response
to the following processes: spatial competition, erosion, grazing, and larval settlement,
the latter moderating connectivity. Initial FD of communities varies among iterations,
is derived from trait information gleaned from the literature, and is quantified in terms
of the volume and dispersion that it exhibits in multi-dimensional trait space. Cyclones
and bleaching events are imposed in the simulation, and the response of communities is measured in terms of resistance, recovery and capacity to retain identity of the
community. We believe that this bottom up modelling approach can contribute to our
understanding of the theoretical relationship between resilience, FD, and connectivity in
coral reef ecosystems, and can also inform ongoing research and management efforts.


EFFECT OF MULTIPLE AND SYNERGISTIC STRESSES ON CORALS AT MICRO/
NANO SCALE (Abstract ID: 28613)
Global environmental changes are recently occurring faster than any other time.
The resulting combinations of natural and anthropogenic disturbances are strongly
affecting coral reef communities. Coral damage can be caused both by abiotic factors
(temperature, nutrients inputs, etc) and biotic factors (overgrowth of algae, diseases).
These factors acting mostly in synergy had resulted in world-wide coral reef deterioration. Coral bleaching is the most impacting process that is affecting coral survival under
elevated sea surface temperature and high irradiance scenario. Bleaching is well known
to occur around the world; however its mechanism is not well understood. This is due
to the high complexity of the “coral holobiont” (coral in symbiosis with its zooxanthellae
and a microbial community that is maintain a delicate balance to keep the coral healthy.
A novel point of view of bleaching mechanism using micro/nano size scales will be
presented: 1) Study of pigments during thermal induced bleaching revealed that bleaching is a detoxification strategy to avoid oxidative stress; 2) Synergistic action of thermal
stress with pathogenic bacteria exacerbates bleaching process and 3) Synergistic effect
of thermal stress in a nitrate enriched environment can impede the recovery of corals
after a bleaching event, turning the corals to be more susceptible to other environmental
or anthropogenic stressors. This scientific approach to study the effects of multiple
stresses at micro/nano scales revealed the importance of organisms’ adaptations within
certain thresholds


BACTERIAL COMMUNITY PROFILING OF CORAL SPECIES ACROSS A BLEACHING EVENT (Abstract ID: 28791)
The functional importance of microbial communities associated with eukaryotes is
increasingly recognized in many fields. The reef-building coral holobiont is notably
diverse with microbes occupying roles everywhere from intimate endosymbionts to
transients associated with external mucus layers. While the complexity is great and
the full architecture of associations is not known, microbial communities are highly
dependent on geographic location, host species, and environmental conditions. Recently,
microbial communities have been suggested as playing an important role in coral bleaching. Recognizing the likely importance of the microbial dimension to understanding and
predicting the response and resilience of corals to thermal stress, we surveyed Acropora
and after a significant natural bleaching event in 2015 in American Samoa. Although
prior to the bleaching event samples had not been collected with microbial profiling in
mind, we developed methodology to extract microbial DNA from our archived samples.
We used 16S rDNA amplicons coupled with multiplex barcoding and paired-end 300bp
sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq platform to survey hundreds of individual samples per
species cost-effectively. Increased sample size and the ability to use archived samples in
microbial surveys significantly adds to experimental power in the search for microbial
correlates of coral heat resilience. We discuss the results of our particular survey as well
as general considerations for undertaking similar metagenomic work.


CHARACTERIZING THE GROUPER FISHERIES AND STOCKS IN SELECTED
MUNICIPALITIES OF THE PHILIPPINES (Abstract ID: 29051)
Groupers are found all over the Philippines but are prone to population decline and extirpation due to high fishing pressure and lack of effective fisheries regulations throughout
the country. This study provides an overview on grouper fisheries and standing stock in
at least ten municipalities in the Philippines. Data from fisheries assessments using focus
group discussions and semi-structured interviews and from underwater fish visual census
were used in the analyses. Results show that municipalities with intense and unregulated
and an assemblage dominated by few, small-sized and least-valued species only. In
contrast, municipalities with functional and effective fisheries management interventions
as in Taytay and Sablayan, have higher densities (4-6 ind/500m2) and biomass (223-486
g/500m2), and with large or highly valued species still present in their coral reefs. In
the case of Samal Island, high grouper density (5.56 ind/500m2) yields a relatively low
biomass (78 g/500m2) due to the fact that most of the observed fishes were juveniles,
suggesting that adults might be overfished. This study provides a list of areas that need
prompt action to remediate further stock collapse and identifies critical grouper species
that should be prioritized for conservation.

France
Australia

PERIODICALLY-HARVESTED CLOSURES EMERGE AS OPTIMAL MANAGEMENT
STRATEGIES WHEN FISH BEHAVIOR IS CONSIDERED (Abstract ID: 29225)


Periodically-harvested closures (PHCs) are a form of community-based fisheries
management often implemented within customary fishing grounds throughout the
Pacific. Communities, and their co-management partners that advocate the use of PHCs,
have broad objectives of fishery sustainability and conservation. However, PHCs are
designed more specifically to increase harvest efficiency, and for occasional exploitation of protected stocks to support local social events. Despite their prevalence, the
effectiveness of PHCs for simultaneously achieving these objectives remains uncertain.
To assess PHC fishery outcomes, we developed a bioeconomic fisheries model that
included fish behavior, and quantified how PHC open-closed schedule affects harvest
efficiency (catch-per-unit-effort), biomass conservation and sustainable fishery yield. We
also compared PHC effects with the effects of non-spatial and no-take marine reserve

RESOURCE COMPETITION AND PREDATION RISK DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECT
PARROTFISH FORAGING BEHAVIORS (Abstract ID: 28442)
Parrotfishes interact with coral reefs in many important ways. They consume algae that
compete with coral for space on the benthos and facilitate coral settlement by scraping
bare spaces on the reef. It has been demonstrated that the spatial patterning of herbivore
foraging may be an important determinant in the trajectory of coral reef benthic state. In

53

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

order to evaluate the relative importance of food resource abundance, competition, and
predation risk on structuring parrotfish foraging behavior, we conducted a comparative
study at two islands that are subject to drastically different management regimes. One
of the islands (Palmyra Atoll) is pristine and unfished with high biomass of herbivores
and predators while at the other (Mo’orea, French Polynesia) both trophic groups are
fished. Our results indicate that both predation risk and competition for resources play
a role in structuring foraging behaviors in Bullethead parrotfish (Chlorurus sordidus ),
but they act of different aspects of foraging. Bite rates were affected primarily by direct
interference competition and chronic level of predation risk, measured by predator
abundance. However, predator abundance had no effect on space use which was related
to levels of exploitative competition from other herbivores in the community, particularly
large-bodied parrotfishes. Because herbivore and piscivore populations are sometimes
independently managed on coral reefs, it is important to understand how interactions
among these trophic groups affect a suite of behaviors related to herbivory.


IMPACT OF OCEAN WARMING ON CENTURY-SCALE GROWTH TRENDS OF
INSHORE AND OFFSHORE CORALS THROUGOUT THE WESTERN CARIBBEAN
SEA (Abstract ID: 29535)
Anthropogenic elevation of atmospheric carbon dioxide continues to cause global ocean
temperatures to increase. Although this rise in ocean temperature has generally reduced
rates of coral growth worldwide, considerable variability in corals’ growth response to
thermal stress exists across the reefscape. Previous studies suggest that corals exposed
to historically greater baseline diurnal and seasonal fluctuations in temperature are better
able to cope with future anthropogenic thermal stress. We investigated the relationship
between historical sea surface temperatures and annual skeletal growth parameters (skeletal density, skeletal extension, calcification rate) of Siderastrea siderea andPseudodiploria
strigosa–two abundant, widespread, and long-lived massive scleractinian corals–across
three different reef systems spanning 2000-km of the western Caribbean Sea. Over 240
coral cores were extracted from paired inshore-offshore localities of the Florida Keys
Reef Tract, Belize Barrier Reef System, and Panama’s Bocas Del Toro Reef Complex and
then scanned for density using computer tomography. Our results indicate considerable
variability in coral growth response to warming both between and within the three reef
systems, with a colony’s specific growth response to recent anthropogenic warming being
closely linked to its baseline environmental history. Results provide one of the most comprehensive overviews of coral growth response to past ocean warming and offer insights
into how corals are likely to respond to predicted future changes in ocean temperature.


A TEST OF TROPHIC CASCADE THEORY: FISH AND BENTHIC ASSEMBLAGES
ACROSS A PREDATOR DENSITY GRADIENT (Abstract ID: 27990)
Removal of predators is often theorized to alter community structure through trophic
cascades. However, evidence is often circumstantial on coral reefs because fishing pressure frequently co-varies with other anthropogenic effects. Australia’s Great Barrier Reef
(GBR) has experienced fishing-induced declines of apex predators and mesopredators,
but fishers do not target herbivorous fishes and pollution is minimal on the outer GBR;
thus, the GBR provides an ideal system to investigate trophic cascade theory. Here, I
quantify fish and benthic assemblages across a fishing-induced predator density gradient
on the GBR, including apex predators and mesopredators to herbivorous fishes and
benthic assemblages, to test for evidence of trophic cascades. Using a structural equation model, I found no cascading effects from apex predators to lower trophic levels: a
loss of apex predators did not lead to higher levels of mesopredators, and this did not
suppress mobile herbivores and drive algal proliferation. Likewise, I found no effects of
mesopredators on lower trophic levels: a decline of mesopredators was not associated
with higher abundances of algae-farming damselfishes and algae-dominated reefs. These
findings indicate that top-down forces on coral reefs are weak, and densities of most
community members are regulated by indirect factors that vary through space, such as
regional effects, stochastic disturbances, trophic versatility, and system openness. We
conclude that predator-mediated trophic cascades are probably the exception rather
than the rule in this complex ecosystem.


DYNAMICS OF CARBONATE PRODUCTION OF HALIMEDA ON SHALLOW
CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 28428)
The calcifying alga Halimeda contributes significantly to the production of carbonate sediments. Carbonate production by Halimeda is driven by primary productivity, calcification
and herbivory, yet the relative importance of these processes is unclear. Understanding
Halimeda dynamics is critical to make plausible predictions about their contribution to reef
carbonate budgets. For example, Halimeda is often flourishing within the complex structure
of branching acroporids which offer protection from herbivory but how coral habitats affect
Halimeda carbonate production is unknown. This is important because these corals are
highly susceptible to climate change. To answer this question we developed an individualbased model of Halimeda population dynamics by incorporating rates of recruitment, segment growth, herbivory and other sources of mortality. The model was parameterized with
seasonal demographic rates estimated using fish-exclusion cages in Heron Island, Australia,
and successfully predicted the observed biomass of Halimeda both inside and outside
Acropora habitats. Carbonate production peaked in summer with Halimeda productivity
being enhanced by temperature. Because carbonate production was higher inside Acropora
habitats in summer, high temperature in the future may increase Halimeda production of
carbonate sediments. However, this outcome may be altered by future losses of Acropora
habitats due to thermal stress. As fish herbivores may also be affected by a loss of structural
complexity, predicting the future of Halimeda carbonate dynamics is uncertain.


DECLINE IN ABUNDANCE AND HEALTH STATE OF AN ATLANTIC SUBTROPICAL GORGONIAN POPULATION (Abstract ID: 29560)
Losses in coral cover have been widely reported for the Caribbean. In contrast, much
less is known about the health state of the Brazilian reef fauna, which was declared as a
priority for Atlantic biodiversity conservation due to its high degree of endemism. In the
present study we assessed the general health state of Phyllogorgia dilatata assemblages
at the subtropical reefs of Arraial do Cabo (southeastern Brazil), where observations
suggest that the abundance of this endemic gorgonian species has declined. We found
that about 49% of the sampled colonies were dead, and 73% of the living colonies were
affected by tissue loss. Tissue loss initially manifested as multifocal holes in the planar
colonial coenenchyme and peripheral tissue retraction leaving denuded skeletal axes. In
combination with other recent studies, our results raise the awareness for an increasingly
threatened Southwestern Atlantic reef coral fauna.




Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment to cooperate on the conservation and
management of Marine Protected Areas – one of the first official bilateral agreements
MOU is the basis for a working relationship between NOAA’s Office of National Marine
Sanctuaries and Cuba’s National Center for Protected Areas (CNAP) and includes sister
sanctuary relationships between Flower Garden Banks and Florida Keys National Marine
Sanctuaries and Guanahacabibes National Park and Banco de San Antonio at the western
54

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

negatively affecting coral reefs around the world. Successful solutions to this problem will
include community ownership and buy-in, sustainable stewardship, and incorporation
of cultural values and practices. In West Maui, recent studies conducted of perennial
streams found that approximately 40% and 55% of the banks of Ka’Opala and Papua
streams respectively consist of actively eroding fine-grained sediment. During rain
events, this sediment becomes suspended, and is transferred to the nearshore environment via stream channels. This creates plumes of turbid water along the coastline,
which negatively impact coastal water quality and coral reefs. Modern adaptation and
implementation of traditional Hawaiian land management practices will help to solve
this problem. The Coral Reef Alliance is leading a knowledge sharing group consisting
of local and regional experts and restoration practitioners who will together identify
solutions that integrate traditional Hawaiian practices such as lo’i kalo (wetland taro
cultivation) into a modern management system. In this talk, we will present the preliminary findings of the knowledge sharing group with the goal of informing similar efforts
underway in other geographies.

tip of Cuba. The National Park Service is also part of the MOU and links Dry Tortugas
and Biscayne National Parks in the sister relationships. This achievement follows years of
work by many individuals and organizations to bring together marine scientists, resource
users and managers in both countries to develop joint conservation strategies for the
marine ecosystem of the region. The goal of this collaboration is to understand, enhance,
shared conservation challenges in the marine protected areas of the two countries. The
signing of the MOU lays the foundation to build important cooperative programs to support marine science, management, and education efforts in both countries.

BIOECONOMIC EVALUATION OF MARINE RESERVE SIZE: PROTECTING
RESTORED CORAL REEFS WHILE MAXIMIZING FISHERY VALUE (Abstract ID:
28457 | Poster ID: 266)


The cost of coral propagation and restoration coupled with limited funding make costeffective measures to protect restored reefs and maximize program ROI critical. Marine
reserves can be effective in protecting reefs and enhancing fishery value, however,
determining optimal reserve size to accomplish both objectives is challenging. A framework for evaluating the costs and direct economic value of marine reserves protecting
restored reefs can inform decisions related to marine resource policy and management.
This study will develop a conceptual model for determining the optimal size (maximizing
the present value of net fishery revenues) of no-take marine reserves protecting local
coral reef restoration efforts and inform a broader examination of the Total Economic
Value and ROI of active reef restoration in the Caribbean. The present value of the
fishery will be evaluated for reserves of varying size, subject to outplanted coral population dynamics and diffusion of fish from the reserve to fishing grounds. Demographic
data from outplanted corals will be used to generate preliminary empirical estimates of
fish population levels, harvest and fishery value. The results of this study may inform
efforts to determine the optimal size of reserves for the protection of restored coral reefs
as well improve the understanding of the economic value of active reef restoration.
Whether, and under what conditions, a clear “business” case can be made for reserves to
protect restored reefs will be useful for a variety of audiences and may aid in prioritization of management actions.

ATTENUATION OF WHITE BAND DISEASE TRANSMISSION INACROPORA CERVICORNIS BY A QUORUM SENSING INHIBITOR (Abstract ID: 28059)
Among the greatest threats to global coral reef health are coral epizootics, which are
increasing in frequency and severity. In particular, white band disease (WBD) has
devastated Caribbean acroporid populations since its initial outbreak in 1979. However,
despite its widespread and devastating effects, the etiology of WBD remains largely
uncharacterized. Here we examine the role of quorum sensing (QS) within bacterial
in which bacterial gene expression is regulated in response to changes in population
density. This is accomplished through the secretion and detection of signaling molecules
were exposed to QS inhibitor (an autoinducer antagonist) and then dosed onto healthy
test corals. WBD-associated bacteria supplemented with QS inhibitor lost the ability
bacterial communities became infected within two days. In order to determine the species influenced by the addition of QS inhibitor, bacterial samples were taken from each
test coral at three time points: (T0) pre-dosing (T1) post-dosing at 12 hours and (T2)
post-dosing at 24 hours (after WBD symptoms appeared in control corals). Microbial
16S V3-V4 rRNA metagenomic sequencing and multivariate analyses were then used to
identify shifts in the bacterial communities between QS-inhibited and uninhibited WBDassociated bacterial communities.

com


MPA PERFORMANCE UNDER PRESSURE: CAN THEY YIELD DISTURBANCE
REFUGES AND ENHANCE RECOVERY? (Abstract ID: 28972)

SEXUAL AND ASEXUAL RECRUITMENT OF POCILLOPORID CORALS ON AN
EQUATORIAL EASTERN PACIFIC REEF FLAT (Abstract ID: 28943 | Poster ID: 201)

No-take marine reserves are key tools for biodiversity conservation, yet their role in
enhancing resistance and recovery from disturbance remains equivocal. Coral reefs of
the Keppel Islands, Great Barrier Reef (GBR), have been heavily impacted by climatic
disturbances (coral bleaching, floods and a cyclone) over the past decade. We monitored
fish and coral communities throughout this period, on no-take reserve and fished reefs.
We found high coral mortality from bleaching in 2006 and the major floods in 2011
and 2013. The highest levels of live hard coral cover were recorded in 2004 (65%) and
in 2009 (61%); 2013 was the lowest ebb in reef condition (heavy losses of corals and
fishes). In 2015, several reefs provided key refuges for coral (predominantly Acropora
spp.), with 50%+ cover. The abundance of the primary fishery target species on the
GBR, coral trout (Plectropomus spp.) is highly dynamic and correlated with the cover
of live hard coral cover, habitat structural complexity and prey abundance. Reserve
reefs have supported higher abundances of larger coral trout than reefs that are open
to fishing throughout the survey period, except when reef condition was at its worst in
2013. The loss of corals, structure and prey eroded the benefits of the no-take zones, but
the rate of recovery between 2013 and 2015 was significantly greater in reserves than
on fished reefs. While coral refuges are independent of protection, reserves that resist
disturbance can provide important refuges that may enhance recovery of community
structure, productivity and fishery target species.

Coral recruitment, the addition of new colonies to a population, can result from either
sexual reproduction via larval settlement or through asexual reproduction via fragmentation. We studied the patterns of temporal variation in the number of recruits of sexual
and asexual origin in a community of species of Pocillopora on a reef flat at Gorgona
Island, Colombia. To estimate rates of recruitment and mortality, we periodically followed recruits during ten months between November 2012 and September 2013 on ten
permanent belt transects (10 x 2 m). Recruitment peaks were observed in June 2013 for
both sexually and asexually-produced recruits, with 0.08 ± 0.07 and 0.76 ± 0.48 colonies
m-2 mo-1, respectively. However, recruitment was spatially variable and temporal
variation was significant only for the rate of asexual recruitment. Mortality of recruits
increased significantly towards the end of the study, but temporal variation in mortality
was significant only for sexually-derived recruits. The balance between recruitment
and mortality of juveniles indicates that in this community Pocilloporids can maintain
themselves through either sexual or asexual recruitment. However, 91.3% of total
recruitment was asexually-produced supporting the notion that pocilloporid reefs in the
eastern Pacific are maintained mainly by asexual reproduction and are, therefore, more
vulnerable to global change than reefs elsewhere.


WEST MAUI COMMUNITY-BASED STREAM RESTORATION: SOLUTIONS TO
PREVENT SEDIMENT FROM REACHING THE NEARSHORE ENVIRONMENT
