(Abstract ID: 29163 | Poster ID: 439)

LABORATORY TEMPERATURE SELECTION IN SYMBIODINIUM CAN ENHANCE
CORAL THERMAL RESILIENCE (Abstract ID: 28516)

Sediment from stream inputs represents a major source of land-based pollution that is

55

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

Loh Samah had the least. Generally, Fungia was the dominant coral recruit at Mu Ko
Surin while Porites was the dominant juvenile coral at Mu Ko Phi Phi. Species composition of coral recruits was significantly different between Mu Ko Surin and Mu Ko Phi
Phi. Coral recruits and percentages of live coral cover were positively correlate (r=0.25,
p<0.01) in all sites. This suggests that coral recovery following the bleaching events at
Mu Ko Phi Phi would require a longer period of time.

Temperature increases of only 1 °C above summer maxima can cause coral bleaching.
This breakdown in the endosymbiosis between coral and their Symbiodinium can
cause considerable coral mortality. As coral bleaching tolerance is dependent on their
symbionts, the human-assisted acceleration of evolutionary processes in Symbiodinium
has been proposed as a strategy to enhance coral thermal resilience. We report an
adaptive response in cultured Symbiodinium after only ~150 generations of thermal
selection at 31 °C, a 4°C increase from the control temperature; the 31°C selected Symbiodinium outperformed the wild-type at 31°C, with higher growth rates, photosynthetic
performance and lower extracellular reactive oxygen species production. At ambient
temperature the performance of the selected-type was similar to that of the wild-type
across most traits, indicating limited costs of thermal selection. Coral recruits of three
Acropora species were subsequently inoculated at 27°C with both the selected and
wild-type symbionts. Once symbiosis had established, a proportion of each was moved
temperature. At 31°C, recruits harbouring the selected-type symbionts bleached slower
than those infected with the wild-type cells, had greater photosynthetic capacities and
Inoculation of corals with laboratory selected Symbiodinium may provide a highly valuable approach to enhance coral fitness in our warming oceans.


VARIATION IN GENOTYPIC DIVERSITY OF THE THREATENED PILLAR CORAL,
DENDROGYRA CYLINDRUS, AND ITS ALGAL SYMBIONT IN FLORIDA, CURACAO, AND THE US VIRGIN ISLANDS (Abstract ID: 28939 | Poster ID: 186)
The threatened pillar coral, Dendrogyra cylindrus, is the only species in its genus, and
thus its extinction would mean the extinction of a genus. Comprehensive surveys of
Caribbean reefs over the past 30 years failed to find any pillar coral recruits, mobilizing
efforts for active management of this unique species. Prior to nursery rearing and outplanting of fragments, the population genetics of the host and its specific symbiotic algal
species (Symbiodinium ‘dendrogyrum’) must be evaluated. Eleven microsatellite markers
Curacao, and the US Virgin Islands were genotyped using these markers. Results indicate
genotype. Host populations in Curacao, however, appear to be more diverse and were
cylindrus is known as a gonochoric broadcast spawner, observations revealed that pillars
might be a hermaphrodite capable of geitonogamy. The low genotypic diversity of
make it imperative that diverse genotypes are incorporated into local restoration efforts
throughout the Caribbean.


LARVAL PERFORMANCE OF A CARIBBEAN BROODING CORAL UNDER HEAT
STRESS DEPENDS ON THE THERMAL CONDITIONS EXPERIENCED BY THEIR
ANCESTORS (Abstract ID: 30009)


Global warming causes increased physiological stress to corals worldwide, yet many
coral populations survive well above their optimal temperature range. Recent studies
have identified key physiological pathways that allow these corals to cope with heat
stress. It is however not fully understood how these traits emerge in a population:
through short-term acclimatization, or long-term local adaptation? We investigated how
heat tolerance traits in a Favia fragum population are passed on from parental colonies
to their offspring. This species grows at the warm-water outflow of a desalination plant
In an ex-situ reciprocal transplant experiment, we compared survival, settlement, and
photosynthetic efficiency of larvae brooded by colonies from the warm outflow site to
that of larvae from a nearby ambient reef. When exposed to heat stress for 5 days, larvae
from the warm site survived 40% better and settled 5 times more than those from the
ambient site. The latter suffered a 15% reduction of maximum quantum yield compared
to larvae from the warm site. We conclude that parents that grow in warmer habitats
transmitted key heat resistance traits to their offspring. Preliminary population structure
analysis supports adaptation as the primary mechanism for heat tolerance. We hypothesize that in 60-years operation of the desalination plant, the rapid generation time of
acquire heritable traits for heat tolerance.

THE NEED FOR AN EX-SITU CORAL RESTORATION NURSERY IN HAWAII
(Abstract ID: 28210)
Hawaii has both large commercial harbors and military ports. The reefs proximate to
these harbors have a higher chance of incurring damage due to large vessel groundings,
spills, dredging activities, and harbor modifications. In addition, there are many small recreational boat harbors around the Main Hawaiian Islands where associated damage from
small boat groundings and anchor damage is common. Given the extremely low natural
recovery rates for coral in Hawaii, there is a strong need to mitigate for these damages.
The Hawaii Division of Aquatic Resources has established the first ex-situ Coral Nursery
in Hawaii, with the broad goal of addressing the mitigation challenges accompanying
modern harbor-associated anthropogenic impacts. The DAR Coral Nursery represents an
opportunity to test a variety of concepts toward innovative coral reef restoration and mitigation, including preservation of rare and threatened coral species in a coral “ark”, asexual
planulation for mitigation, and a fast-growth protocol for reaching size refuge targets.



CONTRASTING ABUNDANCE OF JUVENILE CORALS AT TWO NATIONAL
PARKS IN THE ANDAMAN SEA (Abstract ID: 29363 | Poster ID: 664)

ASSISTED EVOLUTION VIA HYBRIDIZATION: A NEW APPROACH IN CORAL
REEF CONSERVATION (Abstract ID: 28272)

Understanding the patterns and relationship of coral larval supply and juveniles are
crucial in enhancing reef biodiversity, recovery and resilience in response to disturbances. The objective of this study is to compare diversity and abundance of juvenile
coral colonies on natural substrates and recovery trends in Mu Ko Surin and Mu Ko Phi
Phi in the Andaman Sea. Results showed that highest density of coral recruits was found
at Ao Suthep (Mu Ko Surin) while lowest density was at Ao Loh Samah (Mu Ko Phi Phi).
Among study sites, Ao Suthep had the most diverse coral (at the genus level) while Ao

The world’s coral reefs are facing unprecedented changes in temperature and carbonate
chemistry. This rate of change can surpass the ability of many organisms to acclimatize
or adapt to survive. Here we assess the value of assisted evolution via hybridization as
one possible way of accelerating evolutionary processes to assist corals to survive current climate change. Hybridization may create novel recombinant genotypes, providing

56

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

a wider array of variation for natural selection to act upon compared to purebred organisms alone. Colonies of four Acropora species were collected in the Central Great Barrier
Reef and were experimentally crossed in Dec 2015. Fertilization rates were high (>90%)
in purebred and hybrid crosses of both directions in Acropora tenuis x Acropora loripes, as
well as Acropora florida xAcropora sarmentosa. Rates of embryonic development were
assessed for each cross at 3, 9, 15, 21, 33, 45, 57, 69, and 93 hours after fertilization.
Rates ofSymbiodinium uptake, growth, survival and photosynthetic performance under
ambient condition (27.5ºC, 415ppm) and mid-century condition (28.5 ºC, 685ppm,
RCP8.5) in purebreds and hybrids of the two crosses will be discussed. This project will
assess whether interspecific hybridization can be used as a novel approach for enhancing
coral reef restoration initiatives in a changing climate.

As a functional group seagrasses are ubiquitous throughout the Great Barrier Reef World
Heritage Area (GBRWHA), from offshore coral reefs to inshore estuaries and embayments. Mounting concern for acute and chronic anthropogenic pressures on seagrasses
have steered efforts to develop indicators of light attenuation stress. Developing a
“one-size-fits-all” model for the 15 species found in the GBRWHA is ineffective without
accounting for functional differences in their life history traits. We investigated the growth
attributes and adaptation of deepwater (>10m) seagrass communities with a goal to
improve coastal management strategies impacting this functional group. We explored
what role density and stratification of a seed bank plays in meadow resilience, and how
the optical challenges of growing at depth may affect seed germination in these ephemeral meadows. Sediment cores were collected over three years from three Halophila
(≤ 10cm) but followed similar trends among meadows. Collections of mature fruits afforded fresh seeds to establish the first successful seed viability test known for this genus.
Fresh seeds were also used to examine the role spectrally-refined light at depth has
on germination success. While strategically Halophila spp. are known to rely on seeds,
having a more intimate understanding of the functionality of their seed banks and how
they respond to environmental cues, bridges a science gap for effectively mitigating lightdriven loss of tropical deepwater seagrasses.


ENHANCING HERBIVORE ASSEMBLAGES BARRICADE FURTHER DEGRADATION OF LINGERING CORAL REEFS IN GULF OF KACHCHH, INDIA (Abstract ID:
29245 | Poster ID: 302)

Australia, Pratchett

Despite being at the northern most margins of coral reef distribution in the Indian
Ocean, experiencing arid climate, transgressed sea level due to the past tectonic
up-liftment, high sedimentation, semi-diurnal tidal fluctuation, coral exploitation and
industrialization, Gulf of Kachchh still preserves some most temperature tolerant and
wide adapted residual coral population. These degraded and poor resilient reefs are also
affront with the indiscriminate macro algae growth and exploitation of herbivore fishes
at their juvenile stage. Herbivores play a critical role in coral reef resilience by limiting
the establishment and growth of algal communities that impede coral recruitment. Present study quantified the status and seasonal variation of herbivors assemblage on the
natural reefs and artificial coral restoration structures in 3 spatially distinct sites along the
Gulf. Density of Trochus spp. observed high during post monsoon on both natural reefs
and artificial structures (5.04±0.69/m2and 5.38±0.76/m2 respectively). Sea urchin density was found very low throughout the study period (maximum of 0.77±0.09/m2 during
post monsoon). Although density and abundance of herbivore grazers and detrivores
fishes were found assembled conspicuously in and around the artificial coral restoration
structures, it is inadequate for the whole reefs. Managing exploitation and restoration of
herbivory are also an urgent priority to improve the resilience and recovery of the Gulf.
Strategies for improving the herbivores of the reefs are discussed.

CAN FISH HELP CORALS DURING BLEACHING EVENTS? (Abstract ID: 28520 |
Poster ID: 345)
Global environmental change is likely to have profound influence on how marine symbioses operate, thus impacting nutrient cycling, ecosystem function, and evolutionary
processes. On coral reefs, fish living within the branches of coral colonies can promote
coral growth and it has been hypothesized that the enhanced water flow and nutrients
provided by fish could ameliorate coral bleaching. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the influence of small schooling damselfish on the health of their host corals during and
after a thermal bleaching event. Using a controlled laboratory experiment this study
demonstrates that corals inhabited by fish have higher photosynthetic efficiency in both
control and heated treatments and that elevated temperatures caused higher mortality
and a larger decline in photosynthetic efficiency in corals that did not have fish present.
Thus, our experiment provides the first experimental evidence that fish living within
coral colonies can affect coral susceptibility to thermal bleaching. Understanding how
interactions between species, such as fish-coral mutualisms, can moderate the effects of
changing environmental conditions is critically important for understanding the effects of
climate change on reef organisms and coral reef management.



GENETIC VARIATION IN POPULATIONS OF A TROPICAL MYSID, MYSIDIUM
GRACILE (Abstract ID: 30093 | Poster ID: 31)

IMPROVING CORAL PROPAGATIONS IN THE HATCHERY THROUGH FEEDING
AND LIGHT CONTROLS BEFORE TRANPLANTATION TO NATURAL REEFS
(Abstract ID: 30075)

The swarm-forming mysid Mysidium gracile aggregates near coral reefs and are important components of reef ecosystems. Occupying an intermediate level of marine food
webs, they transfer energy and nutrients from planktonic species to reef fishes. However
little is known about the genetic composition of swarms, connectivity of populations,
and thus overall regional levels of genetic diversity. Here we assessed genetic variation
within and among swarms occurring near seven Caribbean islands. The COI gene
was amplified and sequenced for 121 mysids representing 17 swarms. Haplotype
diversity was determined using DnaSP5.0. Twenty-four haplotypes were detected with
a haplotype diversity of 0.93, thus indicating a high level of haplotypic variation. Bayesian phylogenetic reconstruction showed 7 distinct clades. Mysids from San Salvador
(Bahamas), Frederiksted (USVI), Culebra (Puerto Rico), St. Thomas (USVI) each formed
unique, well-supported clades as did a subset of individuals from St. John (USVI). An additional clade was composed of individuals from Guanica (Puerto Rico), Bigelow Guana
(BVI) and some individuals from St. John (USVI). The final clade included individuals
from St. John (USVI) and White Bay Reef Guana (BVI). Overall, these results show that
there is substantial genetic variation among mysid populations and that some genotypes
are shared across the region. This variation may become important as reef conditions
changes in response to changes in climate.

Mass culture of corals using sexual propagation technique was successfully developed
in Thailand. The fertilization rates of gametes ranged between 92-97%. After fertilization
in the hatchery, the juvenile corals were then reared in a land-based rearing system for
at least 2 years before they were transplanted back to natural reefs. The survival rate
of juvenile corals after transplantation into the reefs was more than 50%. At present, 5
year-old post-settlement colonies were detected to be reproductively mature and subsequently spawned every year since 2013. However, since juvenile corals propagated from
sexual reproduction needed to be raised in the hatchery for at least 2 years before transplantation, the maintenance cost were high; more than 100 USD per 1 juvenile colony.
Thus, feeding and light control experiments were conducted to determine whether adding those factors could enhance higher growth rates of juvenile corals in the hatchery.
The results showed that when juvenile corals were fed by Artemia salina nauplii, and
additional lights were added in the hatchery, the growth rates of juvenile corals increased
significantly, twice as high as those without feeding and additional light. Therefore, feeding juvenile corals with supplementary food such as Artemia salina nauplii and additional
light controls can be options for enhancing growth of juvenile corals in the captivity
before transplanted to natural reefs. Detailed results will be showed and discussed.


UNDER PRESSURE – HOW SEED BANKS PROVIDE A FUNCTIONAL CLUE INTO
DEEPWATER SEAGRASS SUCCESS (Abstract ID: 28881 | Poster ID: 514)
57

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM


as well as non-standard techniques such as FuGENE transfection. To date, we have
been unable to introduce antibiotic resistance or GFP fluorescence under the control
of the previously published p35S promoter or endogenous Symbiodinium promoters as
genetic markers into our Symbiodinium cells. Whilst we have not attempted to test these
techniques on other Symbiodinium strains, we propose that a new, radical transformation
method may be required to introduce extracellular DNA inSymbiodinium.

FROM CORAL TO “SPONGE REEFS”? EXCAVATING SPONGES AS INDICATORS
OF CHANGE (Abstract ID: 28067)

DNA-BARCODING REVEALS NICHE DIFFERENTIATION AMONG DIFFERENT GALAXAURACEAE SPECIES (RHODOPHYTA) IN THE DONGSHA ATOLL
NATIONAL PARK, TAIWAN (Abstract ID: 27947)

Coral reef communities in the Caribbean and Florida have changed dramatically during
the past three decades, shifting ecological phases or states. Although sponges provide
habitats on reefs, destructive excavating sponges such as Cliona delitrix also compete
and take over space from declining corals. To evaluate how much excavating sponges
can take over coral reefs affected by climate change, we developed a Markov chain
model based on field data obtained over a period of 10 years from 100 coral colonies
which corals, sponges, and algae are included. Analysis of the ten-year data set showed
coral mass mortality event. Projections of the mean model and sensitivity analysis
suggested that for the continuous survival of this coral reef, coral recruitment has to
increase. When disturbance was added, macroalgae became the dominant final state
on reefs in most projections. However, in case of consecutive, moderate coral mortality events, the excavating sponges could reach higher cover. Under a climate change
at a slower rate. Success or decline of excavating sponges depended on the intensity of
heat stress and coral mortality events that provided the sponge with substratum.

Dongsha Atoll National Park is located in the most northern part of South China Sea
and consists of three parts, namely the inner lagoon area, the reef rim area, and the
outer reef area. Therefore, Dongsha Atoll National Park comprises various marine
habitats, for example, the lagoon, seagrass bed, coral reef and sandy ground. The water
is much calmer in the inner lagoon area that is sheltered by the reef rim area, but much
more disturbed by waves in the outer reef area. Therefore, Dongsha Atoll National
Park is a perfect area to examine how different types of habitats shape the distribution
of marine organisms. To tackle this issue, we focus on common tropical / subtropical
seaweeds, Galaxauraceae, and applied DNA-barcoding (rbcL gene) to assess the effects
of various habitats on their distribution in the Dongsha Atoll National Park. From ten
different sampling sites in the inner lagoon area and the outer reef area, we found four
frequently in wave-exposed area. These results allowed us to discuss how different types
of habitats affect the distribution of seaweeds. Based on our research, we proposed that
Galaxauraceae can be developed as a bioindicator to classify clam and wave-exposed
habitats in tropical / subtropical coastal marine ecosystem.


A NOVEL FEMALE-SPECIFIC AND SEXUAL REPRODUCTION-ASSOCIATED
DMRT GENE DISCOVERED IN THE STONY CORAL, EUPHYLLIA ANCORA
(CNIDARIA, ANTHOZOA) (Abstract ID: 27920)


Transcription factors encoded by the Dmrt gene family regulate multiple aspects of animal
reproduction. Most the studies investigating the Dmrt gene family were conducted in
model organisms from bilateral species, with a particular emphasis on their role in male sex
determination. It is still unclear whether the Dmrt genes found in basal metazoans such as
cnidarians, share similar characteristics with their orthologs in other metazoans. In this study,
seven full Dmrt gene transcript sequences for a gonochoric coral, Euphyllia ancora, were obtained through transcriptome data mining, RT-PCR/RACE, and sequencing. These EaDmrts
were subjected to quantitative assays measuring temportal and tissue-specific expression.
The results demonstrate a unique gene expression pattern for EaDmrtE, which is enriched
in female germ cells during the spawning season. Based on the phylogenetic analyses performed across the homologous Dmrt genes in metazoans, we found that the female-specific
EaDmrtE is not related to Acropora coral DM1 nor vertebrates Dmrt1, which are involved
in sexual reproduction, especially in sex determination (vertebrate Dmrt1). Additionally, high
levels of EaDmrtE transcripts detected in the unfertilized mature eggs are retained in newly
formed zygotes, but decrease during embryonic development. We suggest that the newly
discovered gene might play a role in oogenesis and early embryogenesis as a maternal factor in corals. Therefore, the sexual reproduction-associated Dmrt gene(s) should have arisen
in cnidarians and might have evolved multiple times in metazoans.

PARTNERING WITH PRIVATE TOURISM AND HOTEL DEVELOPMENT SECTORS
TO INITIATE CORAL REEF RESTORATION IN CHINA (Abstract ID: 28257)
The Sanya region of Hainan Island, China, is an important tropical destination for the
domestic tourism market, which relies heavily on coral reef-related coastal activities. The
coral community in the Sanya region has suffered a dramatic decline due to increasing
threats, including coastal development, eutrophication, overfishing, destructive fishing
and coral mining, along with overloaded, irresponsible diving activities. The Nature
Conservancy (TNC) China Program has recently started the first coral reef restoration
project in Sunny Bay and Baifu Bay of Sanya, under a partnership with the private hotel
developer, the Sanya Sunnybay Development Co., Ltd., the owner of the site’s management rights. On-site evaluations identified high stress levels and recruitment failure, which
confirmed the necessity for active interventions in order to increase reef resilience and to
provide time to address the threats. TNC is closely engaged with the partner and planning
to introduce coral gardening, algal and predator removal, marine education to the project
site, and to explore fisheries interactions with local community. This project has generated
a growing interest among local stakeholders that rely on reef-related tourism. TNC aims
to demonstrate a model for partnership between the conservation community and the
private sector, and to initiate a business alliance for conservation. This alliance is viewed
as essential opportunities for engaging the local and provincial governments in long-term
regional strategies to address fundamental issues such as water quality.


ATTEMPTED GENETIC TRANSFORMATION OF SYMBIODINIUM MICROADRIATICUM USING VARIOUS TRANSFORMATION TECHNIQUES (Abstract ID: 28553 |
Poster ID: 119)


The endosymbiotic interaction of Symbiodinium spp. with various marine invertebrates
represents the basis of the entire shallow-water coral ecosystem. The specificity of this
interaction can vary greatly depending on the specific Symbiodinium sub-species, invertebrate species and environmental conditions in question. One of the key advances that
would greatly aid the elucidation of the molecular details of this interaction would be the
establishment of a tractable genetic transformation system in aSymbiodinium species. A
silicon carbide whiskers-based transformation technique was reported for Symbiodinium
microadriaticum 18 years ago, and we have attempted to use this protocol for transformation of Symbiodinium microadriaticum strain CCMP 2467. In addition, we have attempted
to use standard algal transformation techniques such as biolistics and electroporation

DIGITIZING THE CORAL REEF: SURVEYING THE BIODIVERSITY OF CORAL REEF
BENTHOS USING UNDERWATER HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING (Abstract ID: 29178)
Coral reefs are characterized by a high degree of spatial complexity and biodiversity.
Rapid large-scale surveys at a fine spatial resolution and automation of substrate
recognition will help to quantify the spatial structure of the reef’s biodiversity. This is a
pre-requisite to assess changes, both natural and anthropogenic, in the ecological status of

58

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

Many branching scleractinian corals tend to develop symmetrical growth forms. A
long-standing question is whether radial symmetrical colonies have emerged due to the
environment condition such as water movement or genetic blueprint. To address this
issue, we used a computational approach to study whether bi-directional current causing
the radial symmetrical morphology of representative branching corals. Using advectiondiffusion equations we linked an earlier developed coral growth model to simulated, but
varying bi-directional flow environments. We investigated the relative importance of
flow to the corresponding symmetry of the simulated morphologies by changing Peclet
number. We compared the simulated results with in situ collected and CT-scanned
colonies of the genus Madracis and the species Pocillopora verrucosa. The comparisons
relevant to the local geometric property of the colony, and symmetry-oriented traits, that
involve the measurement of how internal branches change relatively to the direction of
the incoming flow. Our analysis shows a separation between symmetrical coral assemblies versus asymmetrical ones with some of the simulated corals under bi-directional
flow environments overlapped with those of real colonies suggesting the symmetry of a
branching colony can be explained by the influence of flow.

coral reefs. We describe a novel method to survey and map the biodiversity of coral reef
benthos using a diver-operable hyperspectral imager called hyperdiver. The hyperdiver
survey technique captures spectral and visual images, topography, water chemistry and light
field data from survey transects. The technique combines the information derived from highresolution spectra and imagery to feed a machine learning analysis, which can be used to
create classified reef maps down to the taxonomic level of genera. Comparison of machine
classification against expert analysis of taxa shows very good congruence. Consequently,
the hyperdiver technique allows us to rapidly visualize the biodiversity of the reef benthos
from the centimeter scale upwards, along with profiling the bedform rugosity and light
climate. We used hyperdiver to survey unique Pacific reefs near natural CO2 vents and reefs
nearby unaffected by elevated CO2 levels. The survey covered several kilometers, and the
data was used to create classified reef maps with 1-2 cm spatial resolution. We visualized
and analyzed the strong effects of ocean acidification on the composition and rugosity of
the benthic assemblage from the centimeter to reef scales.


SIMULATING THE DYNAMIC TRANSITION FROM REGIONAL DESIGNS TO LOCAL ACTIONS (Abstract ID: 28670)

EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE AND SALINITY ON THE OXYGEN CONSUMPTION RATES AND BEHAVIORS OF THE NUDIBRANCH, JORUNNA FUNEBRIS
(KELAART, 1858) (Abstract ID: 29634 | Poster ID: 43)

Regional-scale conservation planning is important to allow emergent system properties
such as complementarity, connectivity of areas, and accounting for vital large-scale
processes. Such scale of planning, however, results in a mismatch of scales between that
of planning and implementing the plans, which occurs at local scales. Despite considerable acknowledgement of this issue in the literature, explicit strategies to facilitate this
transition of scales are obscure and yet to be quantified. Using the computer language,
‘R’, we coded a framework to simulate dynamically transitioning from prioritised regional
designs to implementing local actions, defined by management units, in the protracted
application of conservation actions. We tested how the frequency of updating the
regional design with local information on currently achieved objectives during the
transition, influenced the extent of change in spatial configuration between the initial
proposed design and the final implemented actions, measured with Cohen’s Kappa
statistic. Increased frequency of updating the regional design decreased the spatial
similarity between the initial design and final actions. However, increasing the frequency
of updates also increased the spatial and cost efficiency of implemented reserves
compared to simulations with less frequent updates. Our findings refute current perceptions that the implemented network needs to be as spatially similar as possible to the
best-proposed design, and that frequent revision of regional designs during the transition
to implementation decreases efficiency.

Temperature and salinity are primary environmental factors that influence metabolic
rates of reef invertebrates. Changes of temperature and salinity can alter respiration
rates and some behaviors of animals such as changes of movement and excretion. In
this study, we investigated the effects of temperature and salinity levels on the oxygen
consumption rates and behaviors of the nudibranch, Jorunna funebris (Kelaart, 1858).
The results showed that the changes of both temperatures and salinity levels affected
the oxygen consumption rates of the nudibranchs in all size classes. The results also
showed that rates of oxygen consumptions of nudibranch increased with the increase
or decrease of temperature and salinity levels. In addition, the temperature and salinity
stresses caused nudibranchs inactive or more active than usual. More mucous secretion
and increase of respiration rates were also observed.

EFFECT OF MONSOON ON THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN REEF FISH RECRUIT
AND BENTHIC STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS (Abstract ID: 29043 | Poster ID: 243)


While it is recognized that reef fish recruitment is strongly influenced by benthic
structural features, the strength of this relationship at different monsoonal periods have
yet to be investigated. The study aims to fill this data gap and investigate if there is variation in the strength of pomacentrid recruit association with specific benthic structural
characteristics across monsoon seasons in an established protected area in Mabini,
Batangas, Philippines. In the study, we quantified the strength of association between
pomacentrid recruit abundance with rugosity, vertical relief, loose abiotics and live coral
cover. The surveys were conducted monthly during peak recruitment periods on four
permanent 50m transects. Currently, data collection for inter-monsoonal (April to June)
and southwest monsoonal seasons (July to October) has been completed. Survey for
the northeast monsoonal period will be conducted from January to March 2016. Initial
results showed that reef fish recruit and benthic structural characteristics association
was strongest in the southwest monsoon. Significantly, during this period, more recruits
were found associated with live coral cover and substrates with notable vertical relief.
We hypothesize that recruits aggregate on these benthic features not only to minimize
mortality due to predation but to also seek refuge against high energy waves brought
about by strong winds during southwest monsoon. This study has important implications
in management specifically in modeling the impacts of live coral and overall structural
loss on reef fish recruitment.

SHARKS AND RAYS OF THE SOLOMON ISLANDS: STATUS, THREATS AND A
KNOWLEDGE REVIEW (Abstract ID: 27885)
The Solomon Islands lie within a global centre of coral reef biodiversity, and are a focal
point for coral reef and fisheries research in Melanesia. However, little is known about
the status and diversity of sharks and rays in the Solomon Islands. Nevertheless, sharks
and rays are under increasing threat in the Indo-Pacific, and the limited data available
suggests that they are taken in the Solomon Islands as target and bycatch in large scale
commercial fisheries, artisanal and subsistence fisheries. Recognising these issues, in
2013 the Solomon Islands government stated its intent to develop aNational Plan of Action for conserving shark resources. However, crucial baseline data about species status
and biodiversity are needed to support these efforts. This project collated and analysed
available information to assemble an account of the biodiversity, status, and current
management of Solomon Islands’ sharks and rays. Given the paucity of data available, a
wide range of information sources were explored including published and grey literature,
management documents, ethno-biological information and museum records, as well as
opportunistic information from private individuals such as historical photographs. This
information was compiled into an annotated species checklist, providing the first systematic review of Solomon Islands elasmobranchs, and includes global range extensions for
species such as sawfish. This work also demonstrates the benefits of a broad scale, interdisciplinary approach when synthesising information about data poor regions and topics.

DRONES THAT SEE THROUGH WAVES - FLUID LENSING AS A NEW TECHNOLOGY IN OCEAN REMOTE SENSING (Abstract ID: 30146)
The use of small, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs, commonly known as drones) and
experimental NASA-developed Fluid Lensing technology is presented as a novel means
to image underwater marine ecosystems from above the ocean’s surface, producing
cm-scale imagery in three dimensions over tens of square kilometers. Fluid Lensing
uses water-transmitting wavelengths to passively image underwater objects by exploiting
time-varying optical lensing events caused by refractive distortions from traveling surface


A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF THE IMPACT OF UNI AND BI DIRECTIONAL
FLOW ON COLONY SYMMETRY OF BRANCHING SCLERACTINIAN CORALS
(Abstract ID: 30132)
59

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

to investigate the quantitative change in invasion rates, 60 colonies grouped according to
invasion rate ranges of 0~30%, 30~60, 60~100% were individually tagged at the beginning of this study. We also measured the mortality and recovery rate of coral. Increase
showed a maximum effect at 20~30m, and small colonies showed higher rates of death.

waves. Preliminary high-resolution datasets present the first cm-scale image of a reef acquired from above the ocean surface without wave distortion and show clear distinction
of coral, fish and invertebrate species at depths of up to 3 m. State-of-the-art machine
learning algorithms were used to map coral morphologies and calculate percent cover
with up to 5% accuracy vs. 25-50% error using current remote sensing technologies.
Fluid Lensing thus improves upon existing state-of-the-art remote sensing technologies
captured at meter-scale resolution by up to two orders of magnitude. These preliminary
findings show Fluid Lensing and multirotor electric drones offer a unique and costeffective solution for large-scale surveys of shallow marine biospheres.



THE ROLE OF OPTICAL SPECTROSCOPY DATABASE SYSTEMS FOR MARINE
CONSERVATION EFFORTS – WORKING TOWARDS INTERNATIONAL CAPACITY
BUILDING (Abstract ID: 29943)
Optical spectroscopy data collected for marine system research can assist conservation
efforts by offering valuable reference data crucial to sensor calibration, field validation
campaigns, or as research data alone. While a wealth of spectroscopy data exists, often
access is limited because data are stored locally and subject to the often disjointed
lifecycle of research projects. Yet such data has the potential to benefit the wider marine
system community as well as to contribute to international spectral libraries to fill existing gaps in collections. The crux of developing more holistic user-based data services is
to meld efforts into sustainable research data capability. Capability building requires an
evolution of the data services provided across the international sector which accommodates advancing practice. Distinct challenges are faced at this juncture, which ultimately
depend on financial and user investment, but includes issues beyond user demands for
system enhancements, including: community building, ethical clearance of data sharing,
process development, project administration and liaison with the global community to
promote international standards. Only if these elements are addressed, can infrastructure
initiatives be embraced to build true international collaboration capability. This paper will
present a brief summary of the Australian experience to serve as a catalyst of discussion
regarding the sustainability of spectroscopy research data services and raise the challenges and issues that arise in the sustainable delivery of research infrastructure.

DOES NUTRITIONAL ECOLOGY DRIVE THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE HISTORIES
IN HERBIVOROUS REEF FISHES? (Abstract ID: 27904)
Reef fish have distinct life history signatures with differences driven by variable longevities, sexual ontogeny and somatic growth. We commence analysis of the processes
responsible for life history diversification by focussing on herbivorous reef fishes
comprising 5 major clades (pomacentrids, scarine labrids, acanthurids, siganids and
kyphosids). There is strong phylogenetic structure associated with herbivory. Reef herbivores access a range of autrotrophic resources with processes associated with digestion
and assimilation being highly clade-specific. Those with short life spans, high growth and
episodes of rapid somatic and reproductive outputs harvest autotrophic resources rich
in protein. Conversely those species with extended life spans and low rates of somatic
growth obtain energy and nutrients via carbohydrates through fermentative digestion.
We evaluate how nutritional ecology influences life history signatures. Our hypothesis is
that the dominant herbivores on coral reefs, parrotfishes, have food processing modes
that allow harvesting of protein rich microbial biomass which underwrites their protogynous life history. Conversely acanthurids maintain a life history with modest annual
somatic growth and reproductive outputs maintained by processing of carbohydrates.
Temporal patterns of diversification in each clade are distinct; parrotfish diversified
in the Pleistocene while surgeonfishes have an Eocene history. We identify the recent
diversification of parrotfishes as a unique trophic event with profound consequences for
reef ecosystems.


OOCYTES EXPRESS AN ENDOGENOUS RED FLUORESCENT PROTEIN IN A
STONY CORAL, EUPHYLLIA ANCORA: A POTENTIAL INVOLVEMENT IN CORAL
Sexual reproduction of corals is an important means of facilitating the generation of
new coral reefs. To date, however, the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying
coral sexual reproduction remain largely unknown. We performed a differential screen
to identify genes related to oogenesis in the stony coral Euphyllia ancora. We identified a
expressed in the ovary of the adult coral. The combination of the ovarian-cell separation
method and the RT-PCR analysis revealed that the oocytes, but not the ovarian somatic
expression of EaRFP starts in the early stage of the oocyte and continues until the maturation period. Furthermore, recombinant EaRFP was shown to possess an H2O2degradation activity. These results raise the possibility that EaRFP plays a role in protecting the
oocytes from oxidative stress from the early to late stages of oogenesis. The present
study provides not only the first evidence for the potential involvement of FPs in coral
oogenesis but also an insight into a cellular strategy underlying coral sexual reproduction.

com

RESERVE NETWORK DESIGN TO DELIVER REAL-WORLD CONSERVATION AND
FISHERIES BENEFITS (Abstract ID: 28823)
Recognising the need to preserve nature for its sustainable use, the science of reserve
design has become more pragmatic. An ideal network of marine reserves ought to
promote the persistence of metapopulations while benefiting fisheries by replenishing nearby areas through adult and larval spillover. So far reserve network design has
focused on optimising local persistence through the use of rules of thumb for the entire
closed loops of replacement that could allow the persistence of the network as a whole,
but these have focused on assessing the value of particular network configurations,
not on choosing an optimal design overall. Here we design a network of reserves to
accomplish conservation and fisheries objectives using a spatially realistic seascape,
and the linkages among nearby populations in terms of adult and larval connectivity.
Our reserve network design considers seascape management units and uses dynamic
population models to identify optimal reserve network configurations that allow the
persistence of the metapopulation while maximising fisheries yield. To our knowledge,
the study represents the first example of a reserve network that has been designed for
fisheries benefits while considering network persistence. The resulting network design
will be implemented in Honduras.


IMPACT OF EXOTIC SPECIES (BANTARIELLA BOCKI) ON GORGONIAN AND
BLACK CORAL AT JEJU ISLAND IN KOREA (Abstract ID: 29148 | Poster ID: 219)
In 2015, bryozoan, Bantariella bocki was observed to be increasing rapidly on the
Seogwipo coast of Jeju Island. It was observed that the colonies of coral (Gorgonian
impact on the survival rate of coral. This invasion may be contributing to a decrease in
black coral and endemic gorgonian coral at shallower depths. In particular, the same

60

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS


strengthening fisheries governance could facilitate innovative conservation actions that
help communities defy expectations of global reef degradation

IUU FISHING HAMPERED NO-TAKE MARINE RESERVE PERFORMANCE: A CASE


The benefits of no-take marine reserves are related to the efficacy of protection, where
good protection stems from the combination of compliance and effective enforcement.
This paper reports the occurrence of illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing
within Sugud Islands Marine Conservation Area from 2006 to 2014. The illegal fishing
activities were highly organized, occurred during odd hours of the day, and conducted
at boundary between Malaysia and Philippine water. Fishing methodology categorized
into dynamite fishing, sodium cyanide, bottom gillnet, trawling and hook and line. The
intensity of dynamite fishing reached average to 30 blasts detected a day from August
2014 to September 2015. Fishing with sodium cyanide and hook and line targeting on
Leopard Coralgrouper (Plectropomus leopardus) and Humphead wrasses (Cheilinus
undulates) for the live reef food fish trade (LRFFT). Two illegal fishing targeting on
Leopard Coralgrouper confronted from August 2013 to September 2014. Fish census
conducted on the density of Leopard Coralgrouper before and after two fishing incidents
showed that the fish population abundance was reduced to 5.33 ± 2.39 (N =12) fish per
census, from 29.42 ± 13.24 (N = 24) fish per census and after the two incidents. Fishing
on spawning aggregation has reduced large reproductive Leopard Coralgroupers of up
to 80%. This paper shows that illegal fishing continues posting threat to MPA in Malaysia.
Illegal activity hampered the overall effectiveness of a no-take marine reserve for the
recovery of fish biomass and density.

CORAL-SYMBIODINIUM INTERACTIONS ACROSS A GRADIENT OF LOCAL
STRESSORS ON KIRITIMATI ATOLL (Abstract ID: 29057)
The resilience of coral reef ecosystems is shaped by a variety of dynamic coralsymbiont interactions. Corals host a variety of single-celled algae (Symbiodinium)
clades and types, some of which are better suited to sustained environmental stress
than others. Some clades, such as clade D, provide increased thermal tolerance in
stressed coral colonies, although not without certain functional drawbacks. Determining the mechanisms behind changes in coral-Symbiodinium interactions is essential to
understanding the ability of the coral symbiome to adapt to climate change and other
anthropogenic stressors. For this study, we evaluated the dynamics of Symbiodinium
nutrient input and fishing pressure) on Kiritimati atoll (Christmas Island). We collected
analyzed them using MiSeq ITS2 amplicon sequencing with a clustering approach and
Minimum Entropy Decomposition. We found coral species-specific patterns in symbiont
genetic diversity that persisted across the human disturbance gradient, and site-specific
distribution of “sub-optimal” symbiont types. By describing the relationship between
local stressors and coral symbiont genetic diversity, these results assist in elucidating
interactions between human disturbance, coral-symbiont interactions, and broad-scale
reef ecosystem resilience.



PROTEOMICS OF SYMBIOTIC FUNCTION, DYSFUNCTION AND RECOVERY IN
REEF-BUILDING CORALS (Abstract ID: 28065 | Poster ID: 16)
Because we are in the midst of alarming losses of coral reefs owing to mounting levels of
environmental stress, a much fuller understanding is required of how coral symbiosis is
regulated if we are to predict the impact of environmental change on the future resilience
of tropical coral reef ecosystems. The photosynthetic bleaching response of Acropora
formosa, Stylophora pistillata and Pocillopora damicornis collected from the Great
Barrier Reef were previously compared under empirical conditions of environmental
stress (Beltran et al., 2012). Briefly, after 48 h of stress (high light/low temperature, high
T=48h during each treatment for quantitative high-throughput proteomic analyses of the
intact coral holobiome. Such data provides a vital backdrop to examine the effects of heat
and light on coral bleaching and the reacquisition of algal partners in post-stressed corals,
which will be discussed in context with our experimental photophysical observations.
International Coral Reef Symposium, 9–13 July 2012, Cairns, QLD, Australia.

IMPROVING THERMAL STRESS REPRESENTATION ON OCEANOGRAPHICALLY
DIVERSE PACIFIC REEFS USING A COMBINATION OF IN SITU AND SATELLITE
DATA (Abstract ID: 28871)
Coral reef managers increasingly use satellite products to monitor thermal stress on
reefs due to the ease of accessibility and near real-time updating of these data. Despite
improvements in spatial resolution to satellite sea surface temperature (SST) data, there
is still variation in how well these data correspond to temperatures on coral reefs. Here,
we use a dataset of 62 temperature loggers deployed across the Pacific from 2005 to
2012 to investigate how SST data represent in situ temperatures (IST) at a range of
depths and oceanographic regimes. At many sites, SST data agree well with IST, with
low (≈ 0.3°C) mean differences that are consistent year-round. However, at some
locations, particularly deeper reefs at higher latitudes or in upwelling regions, SST can
over-estimate IST by, on average, 1°C or more and with substantial seasonal variability.
We apply the Coral Reef Watch Degree Heating Week (DHW) metric to IST to quantify
in situ accumulated thermal stress, comparing this with corresponding DHW values
from SST data. We calculated the in situ version of DHW for each site after adjusting
the SST-derived Maximum of the Monthly Means (MMM) climatology by the average
difference between the SST and IST datasets. This improved the correlation between
satellite and in situ DHW values on reefs where temperatures were much lower than
using both satellite and in situ data to better estimate thermal stress across a broad range
of reef environment characteristics, including depth.

BRIGHT SPOTS AMONG THE WORLD’S CORAL REEFS (Abstract ID: 27887)
Ongoing declines among the world’s coral reefs require novel approaches to sustain
these ecosystems. A presently untapped approach is systematically identifying and
learning from outliers- places where ecosystems are substantially better (bright spots) or
worse (dark spots) than expected, given the environmental and socioeconomic conditions they are exposed to. We compile data from 2,500 reefs and develop a Bayesian
model to generate expectations of how sreef fish biomass is related to 18 socioeconomic drivers and environmental conditions. We then identify 15 bright and 35 dark spots,
defined as sites that had biomass levels two standard deviations from expectations.
Bright spots were not simply comprised of remote areas with low fishing pressure- they
include localities where human populations and use of ecosystems resources is high,
potentially providing novel insights into how communities have successfully confronted
strong drivers of change. We surveyed experts about conditions at these sites to
reveal that bright spots were characterised by strong sociocultural institutions such as
customary tenure, high levels of local engagement in management, high dependence on
marine resources, and beneficial environmental conditions such as deep-water refuges.
Alternatively, dark spots were characterised by intensive capture and storage technology
and a recent history of environmental shocks. Our results suggest that investments in


SUCCESSFUL CONTROL OF CROWN-OF-THORN STARFISH IN AMERICAN
SAMOA (Abstract ID: 29088)
Population outbreaks of the coral-eating crown-of-thorn starfish (Acanthaster planci)
are a significant threat to coral reefs. Control of large-scale outbreaks has had limited
success despite over 100 attempts to control outbreaks populations (Rivera Posada et
al., 2013). However, efforts continue to control outbreaks due to the importance of coral
reefs to local communities and dive tourism. This study reports on successful efforts to
simple but effective surface towboard technique, which allowed 50km of coastline to
densities. Subdermal injection of either sodium bisulfate or oxbile was used as a poison
agent. Oxbile proved to be more efficient since only a single injection was needed to kill

61

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

the individual, while sodium bisulfate required the animal to be removed from the reef
to administer 10-15 injections. These methods resulted in the elimination of over 25,000
individuals over a 34 month period, saving an estimated 285,000 m2 of coral reef from
small population outbreaks.

REEF FISHERIES MAY NOT ALWAYS BENEFIT FROM TRANSITION OF LOCAL
FISHERS INTO TOURISM: A SIMULATION STUDY (Abstract ID: 30030)
Excessive fishing pressure has been identified as a key driver of degradation of coral
reefs. As a logical response, tropical marine conservation initiatives often encourage
the transition of fishers into (eco-)tourism. In addition to reducing fishing pressure, this
strategy is also seen as a way to improve the social and financial situation of fishers, and
creates local stewardship of natural resources. Using simulations of model systems with
varying parameters, we demonstrate that while such initiatives may result in benefits
to the fishers who made the transition to tourism, conservation gains depend heavily
on the local context. Fishing pressure is unlikely to decline in systems where (1) catch
per unit effort remains high, (2) tourist opportunities are limited or seasonal, (3) the
fishing industry is shaped by external drivers, and/or (4) local fishers can be replaced
by immigrant fishers. In addition, various realistic scenarios illustrate that conservation
strategies based around developing alternative income opportunities for fishers can be
counterproductive.


A MULTI-DISCIPLINARY APPROACH TO UNDERSTANDING HISTORICAL
CHANGES IN CORAL COMMUNITIES (Abstract ID: 28627)


Long-term data with high-precision chronology are essential to elucidate past ecological
changes on coral reefs beyond the period of modern-day monitoring programs in order
to appropriately assess the current status of reefs. In 2012 we revisited two inshore reefs
within the central Great Barrier Reef, where a series of historical photographs document
that includes anecdotal historical evidence (photographs), elevation and ecological surveys, as well as high-precision U-Th dating specifically tailored for determining the age
of extremely young corals, to provide a robust, objective characterisation of ecological
transition. The timing of mortality for most of the dead in situ corals sampled from the
historical photograph locations was found to coincide with major flood events in 19901991 at Bramston Reef and 1970 and 2008 at Stone Island. Evidence of some recovery
was found at Bramston Reef with living coral genera similar to what was described in
c.1890 present in 2012. In contrast, very little sign of coral re-establishment was found
at Stone Island suggesting delayed recovery. These results provide a valuable reference
point for managers to continue monitoring the recovery (or lack thereof) of coral communities at these reefs. A similar approach can be applied to other reef locations where
an accurate chronology for the timing of substantial declines in coral cover, shifts in
species composition and associated drivers are required.

SEA STAR PREDATION THREATENS CORAL PERSISTENCE IN SMALL RESERVES (Abstract ID: 27847)
Habitat fragmentation and trophic downgrading of ecosystems worldwide has led to
numerous instances of mesoconsumer overabundance that dramatically alter ecological
interactions and processes. On Indo-Pacific coral reefs, population outbreaks of the
crown-of-thorns sea starAcanthaster planci (COTS) are a primary cause of coral decline,
and determining the ecological contexts that promote or hinder outbreaks is crucial to
successful coral reef management. We explored the population and behavioral dynamics
of COTS within a network of small, no-take marine protected areas (MPAs) in Fiji. Using
a combination of observational and manipulative experiments, we found that COTS
densities were 2.1-3.4 times greater within MPAs than in adjacent fished areas and that
sea stars accumulated in MPAs via selective movement from fished areas into coral-rich
MPAs. These findings are contrary to previous studies that suggest reduced fishing pressure, such as via the establishment of MPAs, may help regulate COTS outbreaks by fostering more intact food-webs that can exert top-down control on COTS populations. We
propose that key reserve features including small size and marked differences in habitat
quality (coral abundance) between protected and fished areas may lead to concentrated
COTS feeding within reserves. These findings highlight the context-dependent nature of
corallivory, as well as its implications for the conservation and management of small, relatively intact MPAs embedded within a background of degraded, coral-impoverished reefs.



ASSESSMENT OF THE FUNCTIONAL COMPLEMENTARITY AMONG GRAZING
HAWAIIAN SURGEONFISH: A MULTI-PRONGED APPROACH (Abstract ID: 29862
| Poster ID: 584)

SUB-REGIONAL VARIABILITY IN THE CORAL BLEACHING RESPONSE AT NINGALOO REEF DURING THE 2010/11 LA NIÑA: PERTURBATIONS IN THE CORAL
SR/CA PALEOTHERMOMETER (Abstract ID: 29221)

Herbivores on coral reefs are instrumental in mitigating the competitive interactions between reef-building corals and fleshy algae; however, not all herbivores provide the same
ecological function. Grazers/ detritivores consume turf algae (and associated organic
matter), which are the primary spatial competitors to corals in the Main Hawaiian Islands.
This study highlights functional diversity among surgeonfishes through observations of
foraging behavior, analysis of stomach contents, and analysis of stable isotopic signatures
of muscle tissue (d13C and d15N) for three common species (Acanthurus nigrofuscus,
Acanthurus olivaceus, and Ctenochaetus strigosus) on the leeward side of Maui. Similar
stomach contents was different among species, and variation in composition was influenced by site. Measured d15N values indicate similar trophic position in the three species;
however, d13C values varied among species at different sites, indicating consumption of
different algal resources. Collectively, these data suggest that surgeonfish grazers exhibit
significant within-guild functional diversity with respect to impact on the turf community;
however, the differences and degree of divergence revealed depend on the methods used.

During the summer of 2010/11 a regional warming event driven by strong La Niña
conditions caused coral bleaching of historically unprecedented severity along the
western coast of Australia including the 300-km Ningaloo Reef Tract. However, highly
contrasting degrees of coral bleaching severity were observed from two nearshore reefs
located just 20km apart (~20% at Tantabiddi and ~90% at Bundegi); thus, suggesting
that thermal stresses imposed at these two reefs varied considerably during this regional
warming event. We measured records of Sr/Ca at monthly resolution over a period
spanning ~17 years (1996-2013) from cores collected from massive Porites sp. corals at
Tantabiddi and Bundegi to assess the response of this normally reliable paleothermometer proxy to acute periods of thermal stress. We found that there was a strong (~65%)
temporary decline (~6 months) in the slope of the Sr/Ca-temperature correlation in the
Bundegi coral beginning in the summer of 2010-11. In contrast, changes in the slope of
the Sr/Ca-temperature correlation from the Tantabiddi were more muted; ranging from
-20% to +7% of the slope for the entire 17-year record) and were more likely the result
of sampling inconsistencies related to coral growth effects. The strong reduction in slope
observed in the Bundegi record was observed to be similar to that expected to occur
between day versus night-time calcification. We thus hypothesise that during periods of
elevated thermal stress, enhanced Sr/Ca ratios reflect both a decline in photosynthesis
and reduced activity of the Ca2+ATPase enzyme.


62

ABSTRACT BOOK

ICRS

and the families with the highest incidence were Gobiidae, Pomacentridae, Mullidae,
Labridae and Scaridae. In Xcalak 128 stomachs were analyzed, reporting 3 orders, 7
families and 10 species. The families with the highest incidence in the diet were Gobiidae, Labridae, Pomacanthidae, Balistidae and Monacanthidae.

DEVELOPING TRANSGENIC TOOLS TO STUDY CNIDARIAN-SYMBIODINIUM
SYMBIOSIS IN A SEA-ANEMONE MODEL SYSTEM (Abstract ID: 29156 | Poster
ID: 24)
Transcriptomic studies in cnidarians have identified many intriguing gene-expression
correlations with the establishment and breakdown of symbiosis. Nonetheless, the
molecular bases of these processes remain poorly understood, in part because of the
lack of a tractable genetic system to functionally test candidate genes and pathways. The
small anemone Aiptasia is symbiotic with Symbiodinium and has many experimental
advantages over corals, including a high – but as yet unrealized – potential for the needed
genetic studies. As a first step in developing transgenic methodologies, we are attempting
to express fluorescent proteins from both capped-mRNA and Aiptasia-promoter expression constructs. If successful, these technologies should allow both expression of tagged
proteins for localization studies and the overexpression of candidate genes to analyze
gain-of-function phenotypes. To introduce the constructs, we are using both various
electroporation protocols with adults and larvae and microinjection of zygotes. In parallel, we are developing tools to knock down and knock out genes using morpholinos and
CRISPR-Cas9 for analysis of loss-of-function phenotypes. If both gain-of-function and
loss-of-function methods can be established, Aiptasia should become a uniquely powerful genetic model system for the study of cnidarian-Symbiodinium symbiosis.


WARMING AND ACDIFICATIONALTER SKELETAL MORPHOLOGY OF THE
REEF-BUILDING CORAL SIDERASTREA SIDEREA (Abstract ID: 28336)
Increasing ocean temperatures and decreasing seawater pH threaten coral reefs
worldwide. Controlled laboratory experiments were conducted to investigate and
quantify the effects of temperature (25, 28, 32°C) and CO2-induced ocean acidification (PCO2 = 324, 477, 604, 2553 µatm) on the skeletal morphology of the resilient
Caribbean reef-building coral Siderastrea sidereaover a 95-day interval. Post-treatment
and acidification on corallite height and infilling. Reduced (25°C) and elevated (32°C)
temperatures both resulted in increased corallite height but decreased corallite infilling
relative to the control. In contrast, corals reared under the lowest (324 µatm) and highest
PCO2 treatments (2553 µatm) exhibited both decreased corallite height and decreased
corallite infilling relative to the control. Interestingly, warming (32°C) and acidification
(604 µatm PCO2) projected for the end of the century both resulted in increased corallite
height and reduced corallite infilling relative to the control. Our results suggest that corals
siderea by the end of the 21st century, which may exacerbate observed declines in coral
health across Caribbean reef systems.


COMPARISONS OF PHOTOSYNTHETIC FUNCTION OF SYMBIODINIUM
GROWN IN CULTURE AND IN HOSPITE (Abstract ID: 29622 | Poster ID: 129)
Symbiodinium provides the cnidarians with the great majority of its fixed carbon, while
the animal may allocate nutrients to the alga and offer the alga a safe haven. We are examining the photosynthetic activities of various Symbiodinium isolates, specifically probing differences in the ways in which these algae perform photosynthesis in the free-living
relative to the endosymbiotic lifestyle? Photosynthetic electron transport is composed
of linear and cyclic electron flow. In linear electron flow, electrons are extracted from
water by the oxygen evolving complex of photosystem II (PSII) and then are transferred
sequentially to the plastoquinone pool, the cytochrome b6f complex, plastocyanine,
photosystem I (PSI) ferredoxin and ultimately to NADP+ to yield reducing equivalents.
In cyclic electron flow, electrons are cycled around PSI to establish a proton gradient
assays, we have measured the extent of both electron flows in Symbiodinium both in
culture and in hospite. In our initial studies we have observed that PSI is more oxidized
when the alga is associated with its animal host than when grown in culture under the
same light conditions. These results suggest that the animal represents a strong sink
for the reductant (fixed carbon) generated by the alga, as expected. The link between
this damage under stress conditions, overall photosynthetic activity and the loss of the
alga from the animal host, is being explored in detail in a collaboration of the PringleGrossman laboratories.


MULTI-METHOD APPROACH TO MONITORING A REEF-ASSOCIATED WHALE
SHARK AGGREGATION IN THE RED SEA (Abstract ID: 29267)
The whale shark (Rhincodon typus) is known to aggregate seasonally in specific sites
within its circumglobal range. Among these is Shib Habil, an inshore reef off the western
coast of Saudi Arabia where whale sharks are known to gather each spring. In 2010 an
array of 32 acoustic receivers was installed on and around Shib Habil. From 2009-2015,
59 satellite and 91 acoustic tags were deployed on sharks in the Red Sea, including 33
animals that were fitted with both. Satellite telemetry demonstrated strong populationscale site fidelity to the southern Red Sea. Based on the acoustics, the aggregation season was defined as February through May; these months account for over 90% of whale
shark detections in the area. Levels of activity were compared between receiver stations
and the most active receivers also account for over 90% of whale shark detections.
Approximately 40% of acoustically tagged sharks were detected again the following year.
Satellite data shows that 12 of these phylopatric sharks migrated hundreds of kilometers
away from Shib Habil between aggregation seasons. Establishing this baseline serves as
a point of comparison as conditions change through time. For instance, we anticipate
being able to show whether a recent bleaching event at Shib Habil correlates to a change
in the aggregation during the coming season.


IMPACT OF THE LIONFISH (PTEROIS VOLITANS) IN THE REEF FISHES ASSOCIATIONS IN TWO CARIBBEAN MARINE PROTECTED AREAS (CUBA AND
MEXICO). (Abstract ID: 28409 | Poster ID: 633)


The effectives MPAs are an essential tool for the management and conservation of
fishes communities. However, these MPAs may be exposed to the invasion of alien
species as Pterois volitans. Such is the case of the Guanahacabibes National Park, Cuba
and Reefs of Xcalak National Park, Mexico. In both areas visual census (line transect
censuses and stationary) were performed to assess the structure and composition of
fish assemblages and their conservation status, and its relation with the distribution and
abundance of lionfish. The number of individuals of all species observed and the size
were estimated from 2010 to 2015. In Guanahacabibes the values of density, height
and biomass increased significantly from 2010 to 2013, probably due to the lack of
management actions with the lionfish and the favorable conditions in the area (food and
shelter). Xcalak values of density, biomass and size were very low, due to the protected
area management with the species. The MPA authority perform catches of this species
all year through temporary employment programs. In Guanahacabibes 411 individuals
of lionfish were captured for the analysis of stomach content. We identified in the diet
of lionfish, 10 orders, 19 families and 35 species. Fishes was the best represented group

FAGA'ALU BAY WATERSHED PARTNERSHIP INITIATIVE PRIORITY STUDY
AREA, TUTUILA, AMERICAN SAMOA (Abstract ID: 28256 | Poster ID: 445)
The coral reef in Faga'alu Bay, Tutuila, American Samoa, has suffered numerous natural
and anthropogenic stresses. Areas once dominated by live coral are now mostly a rubble
Force Watershed Partnership Initiative, Faga'alu Bay was designated as a priority area
on which to focus research and restoration to help improve the health and viability of
Survey mapped nearly 1 km2 of seafloor to depths of about 60 m using a combination
of WorldView-2 satellite imagery, IKONOS satellite-derived pseudobathymetry, and

63

ICRS

13TH INTERNATIONAL CORAL REEF SYMPOSIUM

faveolata recruits to acquire symbionts decreased after 4 months. Thus early exposure to
a range of symbiont types, with those within Clade D dominating in samples collected
yearlings did not visibly bleach. As with other coral species that initially acquire a range
of symbiont types, these species may transition to the dominant symbionts found within
may provide resilience to recruits and its continual dominance would represent a potential mechanism to improve survival in response to local thermal warming events.

underwater video and photographs. The resulting benthic habitat map uses a 100 m2
minimum mapping unit (MMU), which is more applicable to ecological studies and
management than previous maps of the area. Unconsolidated sediment (predominantly
sand) constitutes slightly greater than 50% of the seafloor in the mapped area; reef and
other hardbottom potentially available for coral recruitment constitute nearly 50% of the
mapped area. Of this potentially available hardbottom, only slightly greater than 37%
is colonized with at least 10% live coral, which is fairly evenly distributed between the
reef flat, fore reef, and offshore bank/shelf. This benthic habitat map documents current
baseline conditions and will assist with future monitoring and management.

EVERY POPULATION MATTERS: HOTSPOTS OF GENOME-WIDE GENETIC
DIVERSITY IN HAWAIIAN ‘OPIHI (CELLANA EXARATA) (Abstract ID: 29760)


Populations with low genetic diversity can be particularly vulnerable to environmental
and anthropogenic stressors due to the loss of advantageous mutations. Population
genetic theory predicts that genetic diversity will scale with population size. In this study,
we use genome-wide surveys of genetic variation in ‘opihi (Cellana exarata) from the
Hawaiian islands (HI) to test for a relationship between genetic diversity and population
size. Historical ‘opihi population sizes (pre-human colonization) are predicted to have
ranged from ~1E6 to 1E8 and have been reduced by up to four orders of magnitude by
harvesting. Contrary to expectations, nucleotide diversity exhibited a strong negative
relationship with historical census population size but was unaffected by harvesting.
These results indicate that ‘opihi populations within the main HI are not in equilibrium
and have experienced a major bottleneck in pre-human times, followed by a net population expansion. Two alternative explanations are (1) either ‘opihi was extirpated from
the main HI and they were recolonized from populations in the Northwestern HI or (2)
demographic history, migration and mutation rates have led to a predictable non-equilibrium relationship between diversity and population size. Overall, these results suggest
that the ‘opihi in the Northwestern HI harbor a stockpile of genomic diversity, despite
relatively small population sizes. Depending on the locus, however, every island harbors
a genetic diversity hotspot, and management plans should focus on maintaining genetic
diversity range-wide.

THE ROLE OF BASIN-SCALE CLIMATE VARIABILITY IN THE DECLINE OF
CARIBBEAN CORALS (Abstract ID: 29874)
Anthropogenic climate change is principle threat to coral reef survival. However, the
effects of the projected decrease in nutrient export and net primary production (PP)
resulting from enhanced stratification of the upper oceans, has received little attention.
We generated century long growth histories from three dominant Atlantic coral genera
using skeletal cores collected from live colonies across the Caribbean and Bermuda, and
from fossils preserved in Last Interglacial reefs. We find that growth of modern corals
has been in steep decline since the mid-70’s. However these changes are cyclical rather
than secular as coral growth exhibits coherent, large-amplitude decadal-scale changes
through the 20th century. Similar patterns are evident during the Last Interglacial,
suggesting that Atlantic corals respond strongly to basin-scale changes internal to the
climate system. A comparison of our records with output from the MOM4 physical
model shows that coral growth tracks changes in mixed layer depth (MLD). We further
investigated the link to MLD using the nitrogen isotope ratio (d15N) of skeletal bound organic (SBO) material. Interpreting our results within the framework of a coral-symbiont
N recycling model suggests that coral heterotrophic feeding increases under MLD-fueled
productivity, enhancing skeletal growth. The strong sensitivity of coral growth to past
changes in productivity implies that the projected 21st century decline in net PP could
potentially rival and will certainly exacerbate the effects of warming and OA on coral
reef ecosystems.


LARVAL BIOLOGY OF THE CARIBBEAN OCTOCORAL ANTILLOGORGIA
AMERICANA AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR DISPERSAL (Abstract ID: 30018)
Interest in the extent of larval dispersal and population connectivity of coral reef
taxa has increased exponentially. While new methodological approaches have greatly
improved our understanding of larval dispersal, the role of larval biology in controlling
dispersal remains largely unknown. We characterized spawning, larval development,
swimming behavior, longevity, survivorship and settlement of the Caribbean octocoral
over two major events two weeks apart, 5 and 20 d after the full moon of November
2014. Fertilized eggs developed into motile planulae over 2-3 days. Despite the fairly
rapid onset of competency to settle (4 d), the great majority of larvae delayed settlement
for an extended period of time, with 50 and 95% of the original cohort settling/dropping onto the substrate by 36 and 58 d, respectively. Egg buoyancy and larval swimming
behavior changed with age. Eggs were positively buoyant with a mean rising velocity of
0.17 cm/s. There was a significant decrease in vertical velocities during embryogenesis,
but following the onset of larval swimming behavior velocities gradually increased.
Larval mortality in the laboratory was extremely low (10% over 58 d). Behavioral data
such as these are critical to modeling larval dispersal, and these efforts are currently
underway. The pattern of a long delay in settlement, allied with negative geotactic swimming behavior should lead to a high dispersal potential, which may explain the broad


HATCHERY PRODUCTION OF TRIPNEUSTES GRATILLA FOR BIOCONTROL
OF INVASIVE SEAWEEDS IN CORAL REEF RESTORATION (Abstract ID: 29722 |
Poster ID: 476)
The native collector sea urchin Tripneustes gratilla is raised as a biocontrol to mitigate
the effects of invasive seaweeds on indigenous corals in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii. Animals
are hatchery reared rather than transplanted from wild stocks so as not to cause an
imbalance in other parts of the Island of Oahu. Tripneustes gratilla is being successfully raised in the hatchery at the Anuenue Fisheries Research Center in Honolulu. Wild
broodstock are collected and spawned on a monthly basis. First feed is administered
three days after fertilization. Larvae are grown in round tanks with mild aeration. They
are fed a microalgae diet at an initial density of 30,000 cells per milliliter. Feeding density
is adjusted as needed. Larvae are maintained in UV treated seawater, pre-filtered to one
are performed as needed to maintain hygiene. Competency in a majority of larvae is
usually observed at 23 days post-fertilization. Competent larvae are moved to settlement
tanks for metamorphosis. Settlement tanks are prepared with natural biofilms. Post-larval
urchins are allowed to remain in settlement tanks and graze on biofilms for eight to
twelve weeks. At 5mm to 7mm juvenile urchins are switched to a diet of cultured macroalgae. Within three to five weeks of feeding on macroalgae, urchins more than double
in size and are ready for outplanting in Kaneohe Bay.


EARLY SYMBIONT ACQUISITION WITHIN ACROPORA PALMATA AND ORBICELLA FAVEOLATA RECRUITS (Abstract ID: 29009)


The symbiotic relationship between dinoflagellate algae of the genus Symbiodinium and
